<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>Tao Te Ching</title>
    <meta name="author" content="Lao Tzu"/>
    <meta name="translator" content="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
    <meta name="year" content="1997"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <link href="../local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-01" title="Taoing">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way you can go</span><br/>
        <span>isn’t the real way.</span><br/>
        <span>The name you can say</span><br/>
        <span>isn’t the real name.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth</span><br/>
        <span>begin in the unnamed:</span><br/>
        <span>name’s the mother</span><br/>
        <span>of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the unwanting soul</span><br/>
        <span>sees what’s hidden,</span><br/>
        <span>and the ever-wanting soul</span><br/>
        <span>sees only what it wants.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Two things, one origin,</span><br/>
        <span>but different in name,</span><br/>
        <span>whose identity is mystery.</span><br/>
        <span>Mystery of all mysteries!</span><br/>
        <span>The door to the hidden.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-02" title="Soul Food">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everybody on earth knowing</span><br/>
        <span>that beauty is beautiful</span><br/>
        <span>makes ugliness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everybody knowing</span><br/>
        <span>that goodness is good</span><br/>
        <span>makes wickedness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For being and nonbeing</span><br/>
        <span>arise together;</span><br/>
        <span>hard and easy</span><br/>
        <span>complete each other;</span><br/>
        <span>long and short</span><br/>
        <span>shape each other;</span><br/>
        <span>high and low</span><br/>
        <span>depend on each other;</span><br/>
        <span>note and voice</span><br/>
        <span>make the music together;</span><br/>
        <span>before and after</span><br/>
        <span>follow each other.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>That’s why the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>does without doing,</span><br/>
        <span>teaches without talking.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The things of this world</span><br/>
        <span>exist, they are;</span><br/>
        <span>you can’t refuse them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To bear and not to own;</span><br/>
        <span>to act and not lay claim;</span><br/>
        <span>to do the work and let it go:</span><br/>
        <span>for just letting it go</span><br/>
        <span>is what makes it stay.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-03" title="Hushing">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not praising the praiseworthy</span><br/>
        <span>keeps people uncompetitive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not prizing rare treasures</span><br/>
        <span>keeps people from stealing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not looking at the desirable</span><br/>
        <span>keeps the mind quiet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>governing people</span><br/>
        <span>would empty their minds,</span><br/>
        <span>fill their bellies,</span><br/>
        <span>weaken their wishes,</span><br/>
        <span>strengthen their bones,</span><br/>
        <span>keep people unknowing,</span><br/>
        <span>unwanting,</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>keep the ones who do know</span><br/>
        <span>from doing anything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you do not-doing,</span><br/>
        <span>nothing’s out of order.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-04" title="Sourceless">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way is empty,</span><br/>
        <span>used, but not used up.</span><br/>
        <span>Deep, yes! ancestral</span><br/>
        <span>to the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Blunting edge,</span><br/>
        <span>loosing bond,</span><br/>
        <span>dimming light,</span><br/>
        <span>the way is the dust of the way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Quiet,</span><br/>
        <span>yes, and likely to endure.</span><br/>
        <span>Whose child? born</span><br/>
        <span>before the gods.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-05" title="Useful Emptiness">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth aren’t humane.</span><br/>
        <span>To them the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>are straw dogs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Wise souls aren’t humane.</span><br/>
        <span>To them the hundred families</span><br/>
        <span>are straw dogs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth</span><br/>
        <span>act as a bellows:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Empty yet structured,</span><br/>
        <span>it moves, inexhaustibly giving.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-06" title="What Is Complete">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The valley spirit never dies.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it the mystery, the woman.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The mystery,</span><br/>
        <span>the Door of the Woman,</span><br/>
        <span>is the root</span><br/>
        <span>of earth and heaven.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Forever this endures, forever.</span><br/>
        <span>And all its uses are easy.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-07" title="Dim Brightness">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven will last,</span><br/>
        <span>earth will endure.</span><br/>
        <span>How can they last so long?</span><br/>
        <span>They don’t exist for themselves</span><br/>
        <span>and so can go on and on.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So wise souls</span><br/>
        <span>leaving self behind</span><br/>
        <span>move forward,</span><br/>
        <span>and setting self aside</span><br/>
        <span>stay centered.</span><br/>
        <span>Why let the self go?</span><br/>
        <span>To keep what the soul needs.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-08" title="Easy by Nature">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True goodness</span><br/>
        <span>is like water.</span><br/>
        <span>Water’s good</span><br/>
        <span>for everything.</span><br/>
        <span>It doesn’t compete.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It goes right</span><br/>
        <span>to the low loathsome places,</span><br/>
        <span>and so finds the way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For a house,</span><br/>
        <span>the good thing is level ground.</span><br/>
        <span>In thinking,</span><br/>
        <span>depth is good.</span><br/>
        <span>The good of giving is magnanimity;</span><br/>
        <span>of speaking, honesty;</span><br/>
        <span>of government, order.</span><br/>
        <span>The good of work is skill,</span><br/>
        <span>and of action, timing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>No competition,</span><br/>
        <span>so no blame.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-09" title="Being Quiet">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Brim-fill the bowl,</span><br/>
        <span>it’ll spill over.</span><br/>
        <span>Keep sharpening the blade,</span><br/>
        <span>you’ll soon blunt it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nobody can protect</span><br/>
        <span>a house full of gold and jade.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Wealth, status, pride,</span><br/>
        <span>are their own ruin.</span><br/>
        <span>To do good, work well, and lie low</span><br/>
        <span>is the way of the blessing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-10" title="Techniques">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Can you keep your soul in its body,</span><br/>
        <span>hold fast to the one,</span><br/>
        <span>and so learn to be whole?</span><br/>
        <span>Can you center your energy,</span><br/>
        <span>be soft, tender,</span><br/>
        <span>and so learn to be a baby?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Can you keep the deep water still and clear,</span><br/>
        <span>so it reflects without blurring?</span><br/>
        <span>Can you love people and run things,</span><br/>
        <span>and do so by not doing?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Opening, closing the Gate of Heaven,</span><br/>
        <span>can you be like a bird with her nestlings?</span><br/>
        <span>Piercing bright through the cosmos,</span><br/>
        <span>can you know by not knowing?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To give birth, to nourish,</span><br/>
        <span>to bear and not to own,</span><br/>
        <span>to act and not lay claim,</span><br/>
        <span>to lead and not to rule:</span><br/>
        <span>this is mysterious power.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-11" title="The Uses of Not">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thirty spokes</span><br/>
        <span>meet in the hub.</span><br/>
        <span>Where the wheel isn’t</span><br/>
        <span>is where it’s useful.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hollowed out, clay</span><br/>
        <span>makes a pot.</span><br/>
        <span>Where the pot’s not is</span><br/>
        <span>where it’s useful.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Cut doors and windows</span><br/>
        <span>to make a room.</span><br/>
        <span>Where the room isn’t,</span><br/>
        <span>there’s room for you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the profit in what is</span><br/>
        <span>is in the use of what isn’t.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-12" title="Not Wanting">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The five colors</span><br/>
        <span>blind our eyes.</span><br/>
        <span>The five notes</span><br/>
        <span>deafen our ears.</span><br/>
        <span>The five flavors</span><br/>
        <span>dull our taste.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Racing, chasing, hunting,</span><br/>
        <span>drives people crazy.</span><br/>
        <span>Trying to get rich</span><br/>
        <span>ties people in knots.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>watches with the inner</span><br/>
        <span>not the outward eye,</span><br/>
        <span>letting that go,</span><br/>
        <span>keeping this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-13" title="Shameless">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To be in favor or disgrace</span><br/>
        <span>is to live in fear.</span><br/>
        <span>To take the body seriously</span><br/>
        <span>is to admit one can suffer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What does that mean,</span><br/>
        <span>to be in favor or disgrace</span><br/>
        <span>is to live in fear?</span><br/>
        <span>Favor debases:</span><br/>
        <span>we fear to lose it,</span><br/>
        <span>fear to win it.</span><br/>
        <span>So to be in favor or disgrace</span><br/>
        <span>is to live in fear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What does that mean,</span><br/>
        <span>to take the body seriously</span><br/>
        <span>is to admit one can suffer?</span><br/>
        <span>I suffer because I’m a body;</span><br/>
        <span>if I weren’t a body,</span><br/>
        <span>how could I suffer?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So people who set their bodily good</span><br/>
        <span>before the public good</span><br/>
        <span>could be entrusted with the commonwealth,</span><br/>
        <span>and people who treated the body politic</span><br/>
        <span>as gently as their own body</span><br/>
        <span>would be worthy to govern the commonwealth.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-14" title="Celebrating Mystery">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Look at it: nothing to see.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it colorless.</span><br/>
        <span>Listen to it: nothing to hear.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it soundless.</span><br/>
        <span>Reach for it: nothing to hold.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it intangible.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Triply undifferentiated,</span><br/>
        <span>it merges into oneness,</span><br/>
        <span>not bright above,</span><br/>
        <span>not dark below.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Never, oh! never</span><br/>
        <span>can it be named.</span><br/>
        <span>It reverts, it returns</span><br/>
        <span>to unbeing.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it the form of the unformed,</span><br/>
        <span>the image of no image.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Call it unthinkable thought.</span><br/>
        <span>Face it: no face.</span><br/>
        <span>Follow it: no end.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Holding fast to the old Way,</span><br/>
        <span>we can live in the present.</span><br/>
        <span>Mindful of the ancient beginnings,</span><br/>
        <span>we hold the thread of the Tao.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-15" title="People of Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Once upon a time</span><br/>
        <span>people who knew the Way</span><br/>
        <span>were subtle, spiritual, mysterious, penetrating, unfathomable.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Since they’re inexplicable</span><br/>
        <span>I can only say what they seemed like:</span><br/>
        <span>Cautious, oh yes, as if wading through a winter river.</span><br/>
        <span>Alert, as if afraid of the neighbors.</span><br/>
        <span>Polite and quiet, like houseguests.</span><br/>
        <span>Elusive, like melting ice.</span><br/>
        <span>Blank, like uncut wood.</span><br/>
        <span>Empty, like valleys.</span><br/>
        <span>Mysterious, oh yes, they were like troubled water.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who can by stillness, little by little</span><br/>
        <span>make what is troubled grow clear?</span><br/>
        <span>Who can by movement, little by little</span><br/>
        <span>make what is still grow quick?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To follow the Way</span><br/>
        <span>is not to need fulfillment.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Unfulfilled, one may live on</span><br/>
        <span>needing no renewal.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-16" title="Returning to the Root">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Be completely empty.</span><br/>
        <span>Be perfectly serene.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things arise together;</span><br/>
        <span>in their arising is their return.</span><br/>
        <span>Now they flower,</span><br/>
        <span>and flowering</span><br/>
        <span>sink homeward,</span><br/>
        <span>returning to the root.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The return to the root</span><br/>
        <span>is peace.</span><br/>
        <span>Peace: to accept what must be,</span><br/>
        <span>to know what endures.</span><br/>
        <span>In that knowledge is wisdom.</span><br/>
        <span>Without it, ruin, disorder.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know what endures</span><br/>
        <span>is to be openhearted,</span><br/>
        <span>magnanimous,</span><br/>
        <span>regal,</span><br/>
        <span>blessed,</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>following the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>the way that endures forever.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The body comes to its ending,</span><br/>
        <span>but there is nothing to fear.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-17" title="Acting Simply">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True leaders</span><br/>
        <span>are hardly known to their followers.</span><br/>
        <span>Next after them are the leaders</span><br/>
        <span>the people know and admire;</span><br/>
        <span>after them, those they fear;</span><br/>
        <span>after them, those they despise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To give no trust</span><br/>
        <span>is to get no trust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the work’s done right,</span><br/>
        <span>with no fuss or boasting,</span><br/>
        <span>ordinary people say,</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, we did it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-18" title="Second Bests">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the degradation of the great way</span><br/>
        <span>come benevolence and righteousness.</span><br/>
        <span>With the exaltation of learning and prudence</span><br/>
        <span>comes immense hypocrisy.</span><br/>
        <span>The disordered family</span><br/>
        <span>is full of dutiful children and parents.</span><br/>
        <span>The disordered society</span><br/>
        <span>is full of loyal patriots.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-19" title="Raw Silk and Uncut Wood">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Stop being holy, forget being prudent,</span><br/>
        <span>it’ll be a hundred times better for everyone.</span><br/>
        <span>Stop being altruistic, forget being righteous,</span><br/>
        <span>people will remember what family feeling is.</span><br/>
        <span>Stop planning, forget making a profit,</span><br/>
        <span>there won’t be any thieves and robbers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>But even these three rules</span><br/>
        <span>needn’t be followed; what works reliably</span><br/>
        <span>is to know the raw silk,</span><br/>
        <span>hold the uncut wood.</span><br/>
        <span>Need little,</span><br/>
        <span>want less.</span><br/>
        <span>Forget the rules.</span><br/>
        <span>Be untroubled.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-20" title="Being Different">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How much difference between yes and no?</span><br/>
        <span>What difference between good and bad?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What the people fear</span><br/>
        <span>must be feared.</span><br/>
        <span>O desolation!</span><br/>
        <span>Not yet, not yet has it reached its limit!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everybody’s cheerful,</span><br/>
        <span>cheerful as if at a party,</span><br/>
        <span>or climbing a tower in springtime.</span><br/>
        <span>And here I sit unmoved,</span><br/>
        <span>clueless, like a child,</span><br/>
        <span>a baby too young to smile.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Forlorn, forlorn.</span><br/>
        <span>Like a homeless person.</span><br/>
        <span>Most people have plenty.</span><br/>
        <span>I’m the one that’s poor,</span><br/>
        <span>a fool right through.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Ignorant, ignorant.</span><br/>
        <span>Most people are so bright.</span><br/>
        <span>I’m the one that’s dull.</span><br/>
        <span>Most people are so keen.</span><br/>
        <span>I don’t have the answers.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, I’m desolate, at sea,</span><br/>
        <span>adrift, without harbor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everybody has something to do.</span><br/>
        <span>I’m the clumsy one, out of place.</span><br/>
        <span>I’m the different one,</span><br/>
        <span>for my food</span><br/>
        <span>is the milk of the mother.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-21" title="The Empty Heart">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The greatest power is the gift</span><br/>
        <span>of following the Way alone.</span><br/>
        <span>How the Way does things is</span><br/>
        <span>hard to grasp, elusive.</span><br/>
        <span>Elusive, yes, hard to grasp,</span><br/>
        <span>yet there are thoughts in it.</span><br/>
        <span>Hard to grasp, yes, elusive,</span><br/>
        <span>yet there are things in it.</span><br/>
        <span>Hard to make out, yes, and obscure,</span><br/>
        <span>yet there is spirit in it,</span><br/>
        <span>veritable spirit.</span><br/>
        <span>There is certainty in it.</span><br/>
        <span>From long, long ago till now</span><br/>
        <span>it has kept its name.</span><br/>
        <span>So it saw</span><br/>
        <span>the beginning of everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know</span><br/>
        <span>anything about the beginning?</span><br/>
        <span>By this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-22" title="Growing Downward">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Be broken to be whole.</span><br/>
        <span>Twist to be straight.</span><br/>
        <span>Be empty to be full.</span><br/>
        <span>Wear out to be renewed.</span><br/>
        <span>Have little and gain much.</span><br/>
        <span>Have much and get confused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So wise souls hold to the one,</span><br/>
        <span>and test all things against it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not showing themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>they shine forth.</span><br/>
        <span>Not justifying themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>they’re self-evident.</span><br/>
        <span>Not praising themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>they’re accomplished.</span><br/>
        <span>Not competing,</span><br/>
        <span>they have in all the world no competitor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What they used to say in the old days,</span><br/>
        <span>“Be broken to be whole,”</span><br/>
        <span>was that mistaken?</span><br/>
        <span>Truly, to be whole</span><br/>
        <span>is to return.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-23" title="Nothing and Not">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nature doesn’t make long speeches.</span><br/>
        <span>A whirlwind doesn’t last all morning.</span><br/>
        <span>A cloudburst doesn’t last all day.</span><br/>
        <span>Who makes the wind and rain?</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven and earth do.</span><br/>
        <span>If heaven and earth don’t go on and on,</span><br/>
        <span>certainly people don’t need to.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The people who work with Tao</span><br/>
        <span>are Tao people,</span><br/>
        <span>they belong to the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>People who work with power</span><br/>
        <span>belong to power.</span><br/>
        <span>People who work with loss</span><br/>
        <span>belong to what’s lost.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give yourself to the Way</span><br/>
        <span>and you’ll be at home on the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>Give yourself to power</span><br/>
        <span>and you’ll be at home in power.</span><br/>
        <span>Give yourself to loss</span><br/>
        <span>and when you’re lost you’ll be at home.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To give no trust</span><br/>
        <span>is to get no trust.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-24" title="Proportion">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>You can’t keep standing on tiptoe</span><br/>
        <span>or walk in leaps and bounds.</span><br/>
        <span>You can’t shine by showing</span><br/>
        <span>off or get ahead by pushing.</span><br/>
        <span>Self-satisfied people do no good,</span><br/>
        <span>self-promoters never grow up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Such stuff is to the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>as garbage is to food</span><br/>
        <span>or a tumor to the body,</span><br/>
        <span>hateful.</span><br/>
        <span>The follower of the Way</span><br/>
        <span>avoids it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-25" title="Imagining Mystery">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is something</span><br/>
        <span>that contains everything.</span><br/>
        <span>Before heaven and earth</span><br/>
        <span>it is.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, it is still, unbodied,</span><br/>
        <span>all on its own, unchanging,</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>all-pervading,</span><br/>
        <span>ever-moving.</span><br/>
        <span>So it can act as the mother</span><br/>
        <span>of all things.</span><br/>
        <span>Not knowing its real name,</span><br/>
        <span>we only call it the Way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If it must be named,</span><br/>
        <span>let its name be Great.</span><br/>
        <span>Greatness means going on,</span><br/>
        <span>going on means going far,</span><br/>
        <span>and going far means turning back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So they say: “The Way is great,</span><br/>
        <span>heaven is great,</span><br/>
        <span>earth is great,</span><br/>
        <span>and humankind is great;</span><br/>
        <span>four greatnesses in the world,</span><br/>
        <span>and humanity is one of them.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People follow earth,</span><br/>
        <span>earth follows heaven,</span><br/>
        <span>heaven follows the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>the Way follows what is.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-26" title="Power of the Heavy">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heavy is the root of light.</span><br/>
        <span>Still is the master of moving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So wise souls make their daily march</span><br/>
        <span>with the heavy baggage wagon.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Only when safe</span><br/>
        <span>in a solid, quiet house</span><br/>
        <span>do they lay care aside.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How can a lord of ten thousand chariots</span><br/>
        <span>let his own person</span><br/>
        <span>weigh less in the balance than his land?</span><br/>
        <span>Lightness will lose him his foundation,</span><br/>
        <span>movement will lose him his mastery.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-27" title="Skill">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Good walkers leave no track.</span><br/>
        <span>Good talkers don’t stammer.</span><br/>
        <span>Good counters don’t use their fingers.</span><br/>
        <span>The best door’s unlocked and unopened.</span><br/>
        <span>The best knot’s not in a rope and can’t be untied.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So wise souls are good at caring for people,</span><br/>
        <span>never turning their back on anyone.</span><br/>
        <span>They’re good at looking after things,</span><br/>
        <span>never turning their back on anything.</span><br/>
        <span>There’s a light hidden here.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Good people teach people who aren’t good yet;</span><br/>
        <span>the less good are the makings of the good.</span><br/>
        <span>Anyone who doesn’t respect a teacher</span><br/>
        <span>or cherish a student</span><br/>
        <span>may be clever, but has gone astray.</span><br/>
        <span>There’s a deep mystery here.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-28" title="Turning Back">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing man</span><br/>
        <span>and staying woman,</span><br/>
        <span>be the riverbed of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Being the world’s riverbed</span><br/>
        <span>of eternal unfailing power</span><br/>
        <span>is to go back again to be newborn.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing light</span><br/>
        <span>and staying dark,</span><br/>
        <span>be a pattern to the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Being the world’s pattern</span><br/>
        <span>of eternal unerring power</span><br/>
        <span>is to go back again to boundlessness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing glory</span><br/>
        <span>and staying modest,</span><br/>
        <span>be the valley of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Being the world’s valley</span><br/>
        <span>of eternal inexhaustible power</span><br/>
        <span>is to go back again to the natural.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Natural wood is cut up</span><br/>
        <span>and made into useful things.</span><br/>
        <span>Wise souls are used</span><br/>
        <span>to make into leaders.</span><br/>
        <span>Just so, a great carving</span><br/>
        <span>is done without cutting.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-29" title="Not Doing">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who think to win the world</span><br/>
        <span>by doing something to it,</span><br/>
        <span>I see them come to grief.</span><br/>
        <span>For the world is a sacred object.</span><br/>
        <span>Nothing is to be done to it.</span><br/>
        <span>To do anything to it is to damage it.</span><br/>
        <span>To seize it is to lose it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Under heaven some things lead, some follow,</span><br/>
        <span>some blow hot, some cold,</span><br/>
        <span>some are strong, some weak,</span><br/>
        <span>some are fulfilled, some fail.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul keeps away</span><br/>
        <span>from the extremes, excess, extravagance.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-30" title="Not Making War">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A Taoist wouldn’t advise a ruler</span><br/>
        <span>to use force of arms for conquest;</span><br/>
        <span>that tactic backfires.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Where the army marched</span><br/>
        <span>grow thorns and thistles.</span><br/>
        <span>After the war</span><br/>
        <span>come the bad harvests.</span><br/>
        <span>Good leaders prosper, that’s all,</span><br/>
        <span>not presuming on victory.</span><br/>
        <span>They prosper without boasting,</span><br/>
        <span>or domineering, or arrogance,</span><br/>
        <span>prosper because they can’t help it,</span><br/>
        <span>prosper without violence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Things flourish then perish.</span><br/>
        <span>Not the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>What’s not the Way</span><br/>
        <span>soon ends.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-31" title="Against War">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Even the best weapon</span><br/>
        <span>is an unhappy tool,</span><br/>
        <span>hateful to living things.</span><br/>
        <span>So the follower of the Way</span><br/>
        <span>stays away from it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Weapons are unhappy tools,</span><br/>
        <span>not chosen by thoughtful people,</span><br/>
        <span>to be used only when there is no choice,</span><br/>
        <span>and with a calm, still mind,</span><br/>
        <span>without enjoyment.</span><br/>
        <span>To enjoy using weapons</span><br/>
        <span>is to enjoy killing people,</span><br/>
        <span>and to enjoy killing people</span><br/>
        <span>is to lose your share in the common good.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is right that the murder of many people</span><br/>
        <span>be mourned and lamented.</span><br/>
        <span>It is right that a victor in war</span><br/>
        <span>be received with funeral ceremonies.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-32" title="Sacred Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way goes on forever nameless.</span><br/>
        <span>Uncut wood, nothing important,</span><br/>
        <span>yet nobody under heaven</span><br/>
        <span>dare try to carve it.</span><br/>
        <span>If rulers and leaders could use it,</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>would gather in homage,</span><br/>
        <span>heaven and earth would drop sweet dew,</span><br/>
        <span>and people, without being ordered,</span><br/>
        <span>would be fair to one another.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To order, to govern,</span><br/>
        <span>is to begin naming;</span><br/>
        <span>when names proliferate</span><br/>
        <span>it’s time to stop.</span><br/>
        <span>If you know when to stop</span><br/>
        <span>you’re in no danger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way in the world</span><br/>
        <span>is as a stream to a valley,</span><br/>
        <span>a river to the sea.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-33" title="Kinds of Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing other people is intelligence,</span><br/>
        <span>knowing yourself is wisdom.</span><br/>
        <span>Overcoming others takes strength,</span><br/>
        <span>overcoming yourself takes greatness.</span><br/>
        <span>Contentment is wealth.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Boldly pushing forward takes resolution.</span><br/>
        <span>Staying put keeps you in position.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To live till you die</span><br/>
        <span>is to live long enough.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-34" title="Perfect Trust">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Great Way runs</span><br/>
        <span>to left, to right,</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>depending on it,</span><br/>
        <span>living on it,</span><br/>
        <span>accepted by it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Doing its work,</span><br/>
        <span>it goes unnamed.</span><br/>
        <span>Clothing and feeding</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things,</span><br/>
        <span>it lays no claim on them</span><br/>
        <span>and asks nothing of them.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it a small matter.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>return to it,</span><br/>
        <span>though it lays no claim on them.</span><br/>
        <span>Call it great.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>without great doings</span><br/>
        <span>achieves greatness.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-35" title="Humane Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hold fast to the great thought</span><br/>
        <span>and all the world will come to you,</span><br/>
        <span>harmless, peaceable, serene.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Walking around, we stop</span><br/>
        <span>for music, for food.</span><br/>
        <span>But if you taste the Way</span><br/>
        <span>it’s flat, insipid.</span><br/>
        <span>It looks like nothing much,</span><br/>
        <span>it sounds like nothing much.</span><br/>
        <span>And yet you can’t get enough of it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-36" title="The Small Dark Light">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What seeks to shrink</span><br/>
        <span>must first have grown;</span><br/>
        <span>what seeks weakness</span><br/>
        <span>surely was strong.</span><br/>
        <span>What seeks its ruin</span><br/>
        <span>must first have risen;</span><br/>
        <span>what seeks to take</span><br/>
        <span>has surely given.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called the small dark light:</span><br/>
        <span>the soft, the weak prevail</span><br/>
        <span>over the hard, the strong.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-37" title="Over All">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way never does anything,</span><br/>
        <span>and everything gets done.</span><br/>
        <span>If those in power could hold to the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>would look after themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>If even so they tried to act,</span><br/>
        <span>I’d quiet them with the nameless,</span><br/>
        <span>the natural.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the unnamed, in the unshapen,</span><br/>
        <span>is not wanting.</span><br/>
        <span>In not wanting is stillness.</span><br/>
        <span>In stillness all under heaven rests.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-38" title="Talking About Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great power, not clinging to power,</span><br/>
        <span>has true power.</span><br/>
        <span>Lesser power, clinging to power,</span><br/>
        <span>lacks true power.</span><br/>
        <span>Great power, doing nothing,</span><br/>
        <span>has nothing to do.</span><br/>
        <span>Lesser power, doing nothing,</span><br/>
        <span>has an end in view.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The good the truly good do</span><br/>
        <span>has no end in view.</span><br/>
        <span>The right the very righteous do</span><br/>
        <span>has an end in view.</span><br/>
        <span>And those who act in true obedience to law</span><br/>
        <span>roll up their sleeves</span><br/>
        <span>and make the disobedient obey.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So: when we lose the Way we find power;</span><br/>
        <span>losing power we find goodness;</span><br/>
        <span>losing goodness we find righteousness;</span><br/>
        <span>losing righteousness we’re left with obedience.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Obedience to law is the dry husk</span><br/>
        <span>of loyalty and good faith.</span><br/>
        <span>Opinion is the barren flower of the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>the beginning of ignorance.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So great-minded people</span><br/>
        <span>abide in the kernel not the husk,</span><br/>
        <span>in the fruit not the flower,</span><br/>
        <span>letting the one go, keeping the other.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-39" title="Integrity">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who of old got to be whole:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven through its wholeness is pure;</span><br/>
        <span>earth through its wholeness is steady;</span><br/>
        <span>spirit through its wholeness is potent;</span><br/>
        <span>the valley through its wholeness flows with rivers;</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things through their wholeness live;</span><br/>
        <span>rulers through their wholeness have authority.</span><br/>
        <span>Their wholeness makes them what they are.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Without what makes it pure, heaven would</span><br/>
        <span>disintegrate;</span><br/>
        <span>without what steadies it, earth would crack apart; without what makes it potent, spirit would fail;</span><br/>
        <span>without what fills it, the valley would run dry;</span><br/>
        <span>without what quickens them, the ten thousand</span><br/>
        <span>things would die;</span><br/>
        <span>without what authorizes them, rulers would fall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The root of the noble is in the common,</span><br/>
        <span>the high stands on what’s below.</span><br/>
        <span>Princes and kings call themselves</span><br/>
        <span>“orphans, widowers, beggars,”</span><br/>
        <span>to get themselves rooted in the dirt.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A multiplicity of riches</span><br/>
        <span>is poverty.</span><br/>
        <span>Jade is praised as precious,</span><br/>
        <span>but its strength is being stone.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-40" title="By No Means">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Return is how the Way moves.</span><br/>
        <span>Weakness is how the Way works.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth and the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>are born of being.</span><br/>
        <span>Being is born of nothing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-41" title="On And Off">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thoughtful people hear about the Way</span><br/>
        <span>and try hard to follow it.</span><br/>
        <span>Ordinary people hear about the Way</span><br/>
        <span>and wander onto it and off it.</span><br/>
        <span>Thoughtless people hear about the Way</span><br/>
        <span>and make jokes about it.</span><br/>
        <span>It wouldn’t be the Way</span><br/>
        <span>if there weren’t jokes about it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So they say:</span><br/>
        <span>The Way’s brightness looks like darkness;</span><br/>
        <span>advancing on the Way feels like retreating;</span><br/>
        <span>the plain Way seems hard going.</span><br/>
        <span>The height of power seems a valley;</span><br/>
        <span>the amplest power seems not enough;</span><br/>
        <span>the firmest power seems feeble.</span><br/>
        <span>Perfect whiteness looks dirty.</span><br/>
        <span>The pure and simple looks chaotic.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The great square has no corners.</span><br/>
        <span>The great vessel is never finished.</span><br/>
        <span>The great tone is barely heard.</span><br/>
        <span>The great thought can’t be thought.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way is hidden</span><br/>
        <span>in its namelessness.</span><br/>
        <span>But only the Way</span><br/>
        <span>begins, sustains, fulfills.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-42" title="Children of the Way">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way bears one.</span><br/>
        <span>The one bears two.</span><br/>
        <span>The two bear three.</span><br/>
        <span>The three bear the ten thousand things.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>carry the yin on their shoulders</span><br/>
        <span>and hold in their arms the yang,</span><br/>
        <span>whose interplay of energy</span><br/>
        <span>makes harmony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People despise</span><br/>
        <span>orphans, widowers, outcasts.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet that’s what kings and rulers call themselves. Whatever you lose, you’ve won.</span><br/>
        <span>Whatever you win, you’ve lost.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What others teach, I say too:</span><br/>
        <span>violence and aggression</span><br/>
        <span>destroy themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>My teaching rests on that.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-43" title="Water and Stone">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What’s softest in the world</span><br/>
        <span>rushes and runs</span><br/>
        <span>over what’s hardest in the world.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The immaterial</span><br/>
        <span>enters</span><br/>
        <span>the impenetrable.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So I know the good in not doing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wordless teaching,</span><br/>
        <span>the profit in not doing—</span><br/>
        <span>not many people understand it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-44" title="Fame and Fortune">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Which is nearer,</span><br/>
        <span>name or self?</span><br/>
        <span>Which is dearer,</span><br/>
        <span>self or wealth?</span><br/>
        <span>Which gives more pain,</span><br/>
        <span>loss or gain?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All you grasp will be thrown away.</span><br/>
        <span>All you hoard will be utterly lost.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Contentment keeps disgrace away.</span><br/>
        <span>Restraint keeps you out of danger</span><br/>
        <span>so you can go on for a long, long time.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-45" title="Real Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What’s perfectly whole seems flawed,</span><br/>
        <span>but you can use it forever.</span><br/>
        <span>What’s perfectly full seems empty,</span><br/>
        <span>but you can’t use it up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True straightness looks crooked.</span><br/>
        <span>Great skill looks clumsy.</span><br/>
        <span>Real eloquence seems to stammer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To be comfortable in the cold, keep moving;</span><br/>
        <span>to be comfortable in the heat, hold still;</span><br/>
        <span>to be comfortable in the world, stay calm and clear.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-46" title="Wanting Less">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the world’s on the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>they use horses to haul manure.</span><br/>
        <span>When the world gets off the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>they breed warhorses on the common.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The greatest evil: wanting more.</span><br/>
        <span>The worst luck: discontent.</span><br/>
        <span>Greed’s the curse of life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know enough’s enough</span><br/>
        <span>is enough to know.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-47" title="Looking Far">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>You don’t have to go out the door</span><br/>
        <span>to know what goes on in the world.</span><br/>
        <span>You don’t have to look out the window</span><br/>
        <span>to see the way of heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>The farther you go,</span><br/>
        <span>the less you know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t go, but knows;</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t look, but sees;</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t do, but gets it done.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-48" title="Unlearning">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Studying and learning daily you grow larger.</span><br/>
        <span>Following the Way daily you shrink.</span><br/>
        <span>You get smaller and smaller.</span><br/>
        <span>So you arrive at not doing.</span><br/>
        <span>You do nothing and nothing’s not done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To run things,</span><br/>
        <span>don’t fuss with them.</span><br/>
        <span>Nobody who fusses</span><br/>
        <span>is fit to run things.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-49" title="Trust and Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wise have no mind of their own,</span><br/>
        <span>finding it in the minds</span><br/>
        <span>of ordinary people.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>They’re good to good people</span><br/>
        <span>and they’re good to bad people.</span><br/>
        <span>Power is goodness.</span><br/>
        <span>They trust people of good faith</span><br/>
        <span>and they trust people of bad faith.</span><br/>
        <span>Power is trust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>They mingle their life with the world,</span><br/>
        <span>they mix their mind up with the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Ordinary people look after them.</span><br/>
        <span>Wise souls are children.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-50" title="Love of Life">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To look for life</span><br/>
        <span>is to find death.</span><br/>
        <span>The thirteen organs of our living</span><br/>
        <span>are the thirteen organs of our dying.</span><br/>
        <span>Why are the organs of our life</span><br/>
        <span>where death enters us?</span><br/>
        <span>Because we hold too hard to living.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So I’ve heard</span><br/>
        <span>if you live in the right way,</span><br/>
        <span>when you cross country</span><br/>
        <span>you needn’t fear to meet a mad bull or a tiger;</span><br/>
        <span>when you’re in a battle</span><br/>
        <span>you needn’t fear the weapons.</span><br/>
        <span>The bull would find nowhere to jab its horns,</span><br/>
        <span>the tiger nowhere to stick its claws,</span><br/>
        <span>the sword nowhere for its point to go.</span><br/>
        <span>Why? Because there’s nowhere in you</span><br/>
        <span>for death to enter.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-51" title="Nature, Nurture">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way bears them;</span><br/>
        <span>power nurtures them;</span><br/>
        <span>their own being shapes them;</span><br/>
        <span>their own energy completes them.</span><br/>
        <span>And not one of the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>fails to hold the Way sacred</span><br/>
        <span>or to obey its power.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Their reverence for the Way</span><br/>
        <span>and obedience to its power</span><br/>
        <span>are unforced and always natural.</span><br/>
        <span>For the Way gives them life;</span><br/>
        <span>its power nourishes them,</span><br/>
        <span>mothers and feeds them,</span><br/>
        <span>completes and matures them,</span><br/>
        <span>looks after them, protects them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To have without possessing,</span><br/>
        <span>do without claiming,</span><br/>
        <span>lead without controlling:</span><br/>
        <span>this is mysterious power.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-52" title="Back to the Beginning">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The beginning of everything</span><br/>
        <span>is the mother of everything.</span><br/>
        <span>Truly to know the mother</span><br/>
        <span>is to know her children,</span><br/>
        <span>and truly to know the children</span><br/>
        <span>is to turn back to the mother.</span><br/>
        <span>The body comes to its ending</span><br/>
        <span>but there is nothing to fear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Close the openings,</span><br/>
        <span>shut the doors,</span><br/>
        <span>and to the end of life</span><br/>
        <span>nothing will trouble you.</span><br/>
        <span>Open the openings,</span><br/>
        <span>be busy with business,</span><br/>
        <span>and to the end of life</span><br/>
        <span>nothing can help you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Insight sees the insignificant.</span><br/>
        <span>Strength knows how to yield.</span><br/>
        <span>Use the way’s light, return to its insight,</span><br/>
        <span>and so keep from going too far.</span><br/>
        <span>That’s how to practice what’s forever.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-53" title="Insight">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If my mind’s modest,</span><br/>
        <span>I walk the great way.</span><br/>
        <span>Arrogance</span><br/>
        <span>is all I fear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The great way is low and plain,</span><br/>
        <span>but people like shortcuts over the mountains.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The palace is full of splendor</span><br/>
        <span>and the fields are full of weeds</span><br/>
        <span>and the granaries are full of nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People wearing ornaments and fancy clothes,</span><br/>
        <span>carrying weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>drinking a lot and eating a lot,</span><br/>
        <span>having a lot of things, a lot of money:</span><br/>
        <span>shameless thieves.</span><br/>
        <span>Surely their way isn’t the way.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-54" title="Some Rules">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Well planted is not uprooted,</span><br/>
        <span>well kept is not lost.</span><br/>
        <span>The offerings of the generations</span><br/>
        <span>to the ancestors will not cease.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To follow the way yourself is real power.</span><br/>
        <span>To follow it in the family is abundant power.</span><br/>
        <span>To follow it in the community is steady power.</span><br/>
        <span>To follow it in the whole country is lasting power.</span><br/>
        <span>To follow it in the world is universal power.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So in myself I see what self is,</span><br/>
        <span>in my household I see what family is,</span><br/>
        <span>in my town I see what community is,</span><br/>
        <span>in my nation I see what a country is,</span><br/>
        <span>in the world I see what is under heaven.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know the world is so?</span><br/>
        <span>By this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-55" title="The Sign of the Mysterious">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Being full of power</span><br/>
        <span>is like being a baby.</span><br/>
        <span>Scorpions don’t sting,</span><br/>
        <span>tigers don’t attack,</span><br/>
        <span>eagles don’t strike.</span><br/>
        <span>Soft bones, weak muscles,</span><br/>
        <span>but a firm grasp.</span><br/>
        <span>Ignorant of the intercourse</span><br/>
        <span>of man and woman,</span><br/>
        <span>yet the baby penis is erect.</span><br/>
        <span>True and perfect energy!</span><br/>
        <span>All day long screaming and crying,</span><br/>
        <span>but never getting hoarse.</span><br/>
        <span>True and perfect harmony!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know harmony</span><br/>
        <span>is to know what’s eternal.</span><br/>
        <span>To know what’s eternal</span><br/>
        <span>is enlightenment.</span><br/>
        <span>Increase of life is full of portent:</span><br/>
        <span>the strong heart exhausts the vital breath.</span><br/>
        <span>The full-grown is on the edge of age.</span><br/>
        <span>Not the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>What’s not the Way soon dies.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-56" title="Mysteries of Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who knows</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t talk.</span><br/>
        <span>Who talks</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t know.</span><br/>
        <span>Closing the openings,</span><br/>
        <span>shutting doors,</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>blunting edge,</span><br/>
        <span>loosing bond,</span><br/>
        <span>dimming light,</span><br/>
        <span>be one with the dust of the way.</span><br/>
        <span>So you come to the deep sameness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Then you can’t be controlled by love</span><br/>
        <span>or by rejection.</span><br/>
        <span>You can’t be controlled by profit</span><br/>
        <span>or by loss.</span><br/>
        <span>You can’t be controlled by praise</span><br/>
        <span>or by humiliation.</span><br/>
        <span>Then you have honor under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-57" title="Being Simple">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Run the country by doing what’s expected.</span><br/>
        <span>Win the war by doing the unexpected.</span><br/>
        <span>Control the world by doing nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know that?</span><br/>
        <span>By this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The more restrictions and prohibitions in the world, the poorer people get.</span><br/>
        <span>The more experts the country has</span><br/>
        <span>the more of a mess it’s in.</span><br/>
        <span>The more ingenious the skillful are,</span><br/>
        <span>the more monstrous their inventions.</span><br/>
        <span>The louder the call for law and order,</span><br/>
        <span>the more the thieves and con men multiply.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So a wise leader might say:</span><br/>
        <span>I practice inaction, and the people look after</span><br/>
        <span>themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>I love to be quiet, and the people themselves find</span><br/>
        <span>justice.</span><br/>
        <span>I don’t do business, and the people prosper on their</span><br/>
        <span>own.</span><br/>
        <span>I don’t have wants, and the people themselves are</span><br/>
        <span>uncut wood.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-58" title="Living with Change">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the government’s dull and confused,</span><br/>
        <span>the people are placid.</span><br/>
        <span>When the government’s sharp and keen,</span><br/>
        <span>the people are discontented.</span><br/>
        <span>Alas! misery lies under happiness,</span><br/>
        <span>and happiness sits on misery, alas!</span><br/>
        <span>Who knows where it will end?</span><br/>
        <span>Nothing is certain.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The normal changes into the monstrous,</span><br/>
        <span>the fortunate into the unfortunate,</span><br/>
        <span>and our bewilderment</span><br/>
        <span>goes on and on.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>And so the wise</span><br/>
        <span>shape without cutting,</span><br/>
        <span>square without sawing,</span><br/>
        <span>true without forcing.</span><br/>
        <span>They are the light that does not shine.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-59" title="Staying on the Way">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In looking after your life and following the way,</span><br/>
        <span>gather spirit.</span><br/>
        <span>Gather spirit early,</span><br/>
        <span>and so redouble power,</span><br/>
        <span>and so become invulnerable.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Invulnerable, unlimited,</span><br/>
        <span>you can do what you like with material things.</span><br/>
        <span>But only if you hold to the Mother of things</span><br/>
        <span>will you do it for long.</span><br/>
        <span>Have deep roots, a strong trunk.</span><br/>
        <span>Live long by looking long.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-60" title="Staying Put">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Rule a big country</span><br/>
        <span>the way you cook a small fish.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you keep control by following the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>troubled spirits won’t act up.</span><br/>
        <span>They won’t lose their immaterial strength,</span><br/>
        <span>but they won’t harm people with it,</span><br/>
        <span>nor will wise souls come to harm.</span><br/>
        <span>And so, neither harming the other,</span><br/>
        <span>these powers will come together in unity.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-61" title="Lying Low">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The polity of greatness</span><br/>
        <span>runs downhill like a river to the sea,</span><br/>
        <span>joining with everything,</span><br/>
        <span>woman to everything.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>By stillness the woman</span><br/>
        <span>may always dominate the man,</span><br/>
        <span>lying quiet underneath him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So a great country</span><br/>
        <span>submitting to small ones, dominates them;</span><br/>
        <span>so small countries,</span><br/>
        <span>submitting to a great one, dominate it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Lie low to be on top,</span><br/>
        <span>be on top by lying low.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-62" title="The Gift of the Way">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way is the hearth and home</span><br/>
        <span>of the ten thousand things.</span><br/>
        <span>Good souls treasure it,</span><br/>
        <span>lost souls find shelter in it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fine words are for sale,</span><br/>
        <span>fine deeds go cheap;</span><br/>
        <span>even worthless people can get them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So, at the coronation of the Son of Heaven</span><br/>
        <span>when the Three Ministers take office,</span><br/>
        <span>you might race out in a four-horse chariot</span><br/>
        <span>to offer a jade screen;</span><br/>
        <span>but wouldn’t it be better to sit still</span><br/>
        <span>and let the Way be your offering?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why was the Way honored</span><br/>
        <span>in the old days?</span><br/>
        <span>Wasn’t it said: Seek, you’ll find it.</span><br/>
        <span>Hide, it will shelter you.</span><br/>
        <span>So it was honored under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-63" title="Consider Beginnings">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do without doing.</span><br/>
        <span>Act without action.</span><br/>
        <span>Savor the flavorless.</span><br/>
        <span>Treat the small as large,</span><br/>
        <span>the few as many.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Meet injury</span><br/>
        <span>with the power of goodness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Study the hard while it’s easy.</span><br/>
        <span>Do big things while they’re small.</span><br/>
        <span>The hardest jobs in the world start out easy,</span><br/>
        <span>the great affairs of the world start small.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise soul,</span><br/>
        <span>by never dealing with great things,</span><br/>
        <span>gets great things done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Now, since taking things too lightly makes them</span><br/>
        <span>worthless,</span><br/>
        <span>and taking things too easy makes them hard,</span><br/>
        <span>the wise soul,</span><br/>
        <span>by treating the easy as hard,</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t find anything hard.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-64" title="Mindful of Little Things">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It’s easy to keep hold of what hasn’t stirred,</span><br/>
        <span>easy to plan what hasn’t occurred.</span><br/>
        <span>It’s easy to shatter delicate things,</span><br/>
        <span>easy to scatter little things.</span><br/>
        <span>Do things before they happen.</span><br/>
        <span>Get them straight before they get mixed up.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The tree you can’t reach your arms around</span><br/>
        <span>grew from a tiny seedling.</span><br/>
        <span>The nine-story tower rises</span><br/>
        <span>from a heap of clay.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten-thousand-mile journey</span><br/>
        <span>begins beneath your foot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do, and do wrong;</span><br/>
        <span>Hold on, and lose.</span><br/>
        <span>Not doing, the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t do it wrong,</span><br/>
        <span>and not holding on,</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t lose it.</span><br/>
        <span>(In all their undertakings,</span><br/>
        <span>it’s just as they’re almost finished</span><br/>
        <span>that people go wrong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Mind the end as the beginning,</span><br/>
        <span>then it won’t go wrong.)</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>That’s why the wise</span><br/>
        <span>want not to want,</span><br/>
        <span>care nothing for hard-won treasures,</span><br/>
        <span>learn not to be learned,</span><br/>
        <span>turn back to what people overlooked.</span><br/>
        <span>They go along with things as they are,</span><br/>
        <span>but don’t presume to act.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-65" title="One Power">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Once upon a time</span><br/>
        <span>those who ruled according to the Way</span><br/>
        <span>didn’t use it to make people knowing</span><br/>
        <span>but to keep them unknowing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People get hard to manage</span><br/>
        <span>when they know too much.</span><br/>
        <span>Whoever rules by intellect</span><br/>
        <span>is a curse upon the land.</span><br/>
        <span>Whoever rules by ignorance</span><br/>
        <span>is a blessing on it.</span><br/>
        <span>To understand these things</span><br/>
        <span>is to have a pattern and a model,</span><br/>
        <span>and to understand the pattern and the model</span><br/>
        <span>is mysterious power.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Mysterious power</span><br/>
        <span>goes deep.</span><br/>
        <span>It reaches far.</span><br/>
        <span>It follows things back,</span><br/>
        <span>clear back to the great oneness.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-66" title="Lowdown">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Lakes and rivers are lords of the hundred valleys.</span><br/>
        <span>Why? Because they’ll go lower.</span><br/>
        <span>So they’re the lords of the hundred valleys.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Just so, a wise soul,</span><br/>
        <span>wanting to be above other people,</span><br/>
        <span>talks to them from below</span><br/>
        <span>and to guide them</span><br/>
        <span>follows them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>And so the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>predominates without dominating,</span><br/>
        <span>and leads without misleading.</span><br/>
        <span>And people don’t get tired</span><br/>
        <span>of enjoying and praising</span><br/>
        <span>one who, not competing,</span><br/>
        <span>has in all the world</span><br/>
        <span>no competitor.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-67" title="Three Treasures">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everybody says my way</span><br/>
        <span>is great but improbable.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All greatness</span><br/>
        <span>is improbable.</span><br/>
        <span>What’s probable</span><br/>
        <span>is tedious and petty.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I have three treasures.</span><br/>
        <span>I keep and treasure them.</span><br/>
        <span>The first, mercy,</span><br/>
        <span>the second, moderation,</span><br/>
        <span>the third, modesty.</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re merciful you can be brave,</span><br/>
        <span>if you’re moderate you can be generous,</span><br/>
        <span>and if you don’t presume to lead</span><br/>
        <span>you can lead the high and mighty.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>But to be brave without compassion,</span><br/>
        <span>or generous without self-restraint,</span><br/>
        <span>or to take the lead,</span><br/>
        <span>is fatal.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Compassion wins the battle</span><br/>
        <span>and holds the fort;</span><br/>
        <span>it is the bulwark set</span><br/>
        <span>around those heaven helps.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-68" title="Heaven’s Lead">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The best captain doesn’t rush in front.</span><br/>
        <span>The fiercest fighter doesn’t bluster.</span><br/>
        <span>The big winner isn’t competing.</span><br/>
        <span>The best boss takes a low footing.</span><br/>
        <span>This is the power of noncompetition.</span><br/>
        <span>This is the right use of ability.</span><br/>
        <span>To follow heaven’s lead</span><br/>
        <span>has always been the best way.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-69" title="Using Mystery">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The expert in warfare says:</span><br/>
        <span>Rather than dare make the attack</span><br/>
        <span>I’d take the attack;</span><br/>
        <span>rather than dare advance an inch</span><br/>
        <span>I’d retreat a foot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It’s called marching without marching,</span><br/>
        <span>rolling up your sleeves without flexing your muscles,</span><br/>
        <span>being armed without weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>giving the attacker no opponent.</span><br/>
        <span>Nothing’s worse than attacking what yields.</span><br/>
        <span>To attack what yields is to throw away the prize.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So, when matched armies meet,</span><br/>
        <span>the one who comes to grief</span><br/>
        <span>is the true victor.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-70" title="Being Obscure">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words are so easy to understand,</span><br/>
        <span>so easy to follow,</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>and yet nobody in the world</span><br/>
        <span>understands or follows them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Words come from an ancestry,</span><br/>
        <span>deeds from a mastery:</span><br/>
        <span>when these are unknown, so am I.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In my obscurity</span><br/>
        <span>is my value.</span><br/>
        <span>That’s why the wise</span><br/>
        <span>wear their jade under common clothes.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-71" title="The Sick Mind">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know without knowing is best.</span><br/>
        <span>Not knowing without knowing it is sick.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To be sick of sickness</span><br/>
        <span>is the only cure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wise aren’t sick.</span><br/>
        <span>They’re sick of sickness,</span><br/>
        <span>so they’re well.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-72" title="The Right Fear">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When we don’t fear what we should fear</span><br/>
        <span>we are in fearful danger.</span><br/>
        <span>We ought not to live in narrow houses,</span><br/>
        <span>we ought not to do stupid work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If we don’t accept stupidity</span><br/>
        <span>we won’t act stupidly.</span><br/>
        <span>So, wise souls know but don’t show themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>look after but don’t prize themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>letting the one go, keeping the other.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-73" title="Daring to Do">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Brave daring leads to death.</span><br/>
        <span>Brave caution leads to life.</span><br/>
        <span>The choice can be the right one</span><br/>
        <span>or the wrong one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who will interpret</span><br/>
        <span>the judgment of heaven?</span><br/>
        <span>Even the wise soul</span><br/>
        <span>finds it hard.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way of heaven</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t compete</span><br/>
        <span>yet wins handily,</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t speak</span><br/>
        <span>yet answers fully,</span><br/>
        <span>doesn’t summon</span><br/>
        <span>yet attracts.</span><br/>
        <span>It acts</span><br/>
        <span>perfectly easily.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The net of heaven</span><br/>
        <span>is vast, vast,</span><br/>
        <span>wide-meshed,</span><br/>
        <span>yet misses nothing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-74" title="The Lord of Slaughter">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When normal, decent people don’t fear death,</span><br/>
        <span>how can you use death to frighten them?</span><br/>
        <span>Even when they have a normal fear of death,</span><br/>
        <span>who of us dare take and kill the one who doesn’t?</span><br/>
        <span>When people are normal and decent and death-fearing,</span><br/>
        <span>there’s always an executioner.</span><br/>
        <span>To take the place of that executioner</span><br/>
        <span>is to take the place of the great carpenter.</span><br/>
        <span>People who cut the great carpenter’s wood</span><br/>
        <span>seldom get off with their hands unhurt.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-75" title="Greed">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People are starving.</span><br/>
        <span>The rich gobble taxes,</span><br/>
        <span>that’s why people are starving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People rebel.</span><br/>
        <span>The rich oppress them,</span><br/>
        <span>that’s why people rebel.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People hold life cheap.</span><br/>
        <span>The rich make it too costly,</span><br/>
        <span>that’s why people hold it cheap.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>But those who don’t live for the sake of living</span><br/>
        <span>are worth more than the wealth-seekers.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-76" title="Hardness">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Living people</span><br/>
        <span>are soft and tender.</span><br/>
        <span>Corpses are hard and stiff.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things,</span><br/>
        <span>the living grass, the trees,</span><br/>
        <span>are soft, pliant.</span><br/>
        <span>Dead, they’re dry and brittle.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So hardness and stiffness</span><br/>
        <span>go with death;</span><br/>
        <span>tenderness, softness,</span><br/>
        <span>go with life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>And the hard sword fails,</span><br/>
        <span>the stiff tree’s felled.</span><br/>
        <span>The hard and great go under.</span><br/>
        <span>The soft and weak stay up.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-77" title="The Bow">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way of heaven</span><br/>
        <span>is like a bow bent to shoot:</span><br/>
        <span>its top end brought down,</span><br/>
        <span>its lower end raised up.</span><br/>
        <span>It brings the high down,</span><br/>
        <span>lifts the low,</span><br/>
        <span>takes from those who have,</span><br/>
        <span>gives to those who have not.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Such is the Way of heaven,</span><br/>
        <span>taking from people who have,</span><br/>
        <span>giving to people who have not.</span><br/>
        <span>Not so the human way:</span><br/>
        <span>it takes from those who have not</span><br/>
        <span>to fill up those who have.</span><br/>
        <span>Who has enough to fill up everybody?</span><br/>
        <span>Only those who have the Way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise</span><br/>
        <span>do without claiming,</span><br/>
        <span>achieve without asserting,</span><br/>
        <span>wishing not to show their worth.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-78" title="Paradoxes">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nothing in the world</span><br/>
        <span>is as soft, as weak, as water;</span><br/>
        <span>nothing else can wear away</span><br/>
        <span>the hard, the strong,</span><br/>
        <span>and remain unaltered.</span><br/>
        <span>Soft overcomes hard,</span><br/>
        <span>weak overcomes strong.</span><br/>
        <span>Everybody knows it,</span><br/>
        <span>nobody uses the knowledge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So the wise say:</span><br/>
        <span>By bearing common defilements</span><br/>
        <span>you become a sacrificer at the altar of earth;</span><br/>
        <span>by bearing common evils</span><br/>
        <span>you become a lord of the world.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Right words sound wrong.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-79" title="Keeping the Contract">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>After a great enmity is settled</span><br/>
        <span>some enmity always remains.</span><br/>
        <span>How to make peace?</span><br/>
        <span>Wise souls keep their part of the contract</span><br/>
        <span>and don’t make demands on others.</span><br/>
        <span>People whose power is real fulfill their obligations;</span><br/>
        <span>people whose power is hollow insist on their claims.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way of heaven plays no favorites.</span><br/>
        <span>It stays with the good.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-80" title="Freedom">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Let there be a little country without many people.</span><br/>
        <span>Let them have tools that do the work of ten or</span><br/>
        <span>a hundred,</span><br/>
        <span>and never use them.</span><br/>
        <span>Let them be mindful of death</span><br/>
        <span>and disinclined to long journeys.</span><br/>
        <span>They’d have ships and carriages,</span><br/>
        <span>but no place to go.</span><br/>
        <span>They’d have armor and weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>but no parades.</span><br/>
        <span>Instead of writing,</span><br/>
        <span>they might go back to using knotted cords.</span><br/>
        <span>They’d enjoy eating,</span><br/>
        <span>take pleasure in clothes,</span><br/>
        <span>be happy with their houses,</span><br/>
        <span>devoted to their customs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The next little country might be so close</span><br/>
        <span>the people could hear cocks crowing</span><br/>
        <span>and dogs barking there,</span><br/>
        <span>but they’d get old and die</span><br/>
        <span>without ever having been there.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-81" title="Telling It True">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True words aren’t charming,</span><br/>
        <span>charming words aren’t true.</span><br/>
        <span>Good people aren’t contentious,</span><br/>
        <span>contentious people aren’t good.</span><br/>
        <span>People who know aren’t learned,</span><br/>
        <span>learned people don’t know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Wise souls don’t hoard;</span><br/>
        <span>the more they do for others the more they have,</span><br/>
        <span>the more they give the richer they are.</span><br/>
        <span>The Way of heaven profits without destroying.</span><br/>
        <span>Doing without outdoing</span><br/>
        <span>is the Way of the wise.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="endnotes">
<h2 class="chapter">Notes</h2>
<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-01">
    <h4>01</h4>
    <p>Here, for the words in the third verse that I render “what it wants,” I use the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text. The words in the standard text mean boundaries, or limits, or outcomes. This version seems to follow more comprehensibly from the preceding lines.</p>
    <p>And yet the idea of what can be delimited or made manifest is relevant. In the last verse, the two “whose identity is mystery” may be understood to be the hidden, the unnameable, the limitless vision of the freed soul—and the manifest, the nameable, the field of vision limited by our wants. But the endlessness of all that is, and the limitation of mortal bodily life, are the same, and their sameness is the key to the door.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-05">
    <h4>05</h4>
    <p>As I said above, in a few of the poems I leave out lines which I find weaken the coherence of the text to the point that I believe them to be a long-ago reader’s marginal notes which got incorporated in later copyings. My authority for these omissions is strictly personal and aesthetic. Here I omit the last two lines. Translations of them vary greatly; my version is:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Mere talk runs dry.</span><br/>
        <span>Best keep to the center.</span>
    </p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-12">
    <h4>12</h4>
    <p>There are times Lao Tzu sounds very like Henry David Thoreau, but Lao Tzu was kinder. When Thoreau says to distrust any enterprise that requires new clothes, I distrust him. He is macho, flaunting his asceticism. Lao Tzu knows that getting all entangled with the external keeps us from the eternal, but (see chapter 80) he also understands that sometimes people like to get dressed up.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-13">
    <h4>13</h4>
    <p><i>T’ien hsia</i>, “under heaven,” <i>i.e.</i> the Empire, or the world: here I render it as “the public good,” “the commonwealth,” and “the body politic.”</p>
    <p>J. P. Seaton comments: “When Lao Tzu mentions ‘the Empire’ or ‘all under heaven,’ he does so with the assumption that all his readers know that it is a commonwealth where only the ruler who rules by virtue of virtue alone is legitimate.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-17" title="17, 18, 19">
    <h4>17, 18, 19</h4>
    <p>Henricks considers these three chapters (17, 18, 19) to belong together. The last two lines of 19 are usually printed as the first two lines of 20, but Henricks thinks they belong here, and I follow him.</p>
    <p>In 18, line 6, the words <i>hsiao tzu</i> are traditionally translated as “filial piety and paternal affection,” a Confucian ideal. In that chapter Lao Tzu cites these dutiful families as a symptom of social disorder. But in chapter 19, line 4, <i>hsiao tzu</i> appears as the good that will result when people cease being moralistic. Unable to reconcile these contradictory usages, and feeling that Lao Tzu was far more likely to use Confucian language satirically than straightforwardly, I fudged the translation in chapter 19, calling it “family feeling.” Evidently we aren’t the only society or generation to puzzle over what a family is and ought to be.</p>
    <p>Sometimes I translate the characters <i>su</i> and <i>p’u</i> with such words as <i>simple, natural</i>. Though the phrase “the uncarved block” has become familiar to many, yet metaphor may distance ideas and weaken a direct statement. But sometimes, as here, I use the traditional metaphors, because the context so clearly implies knowing something as an artist knows her materials, keeping hold on something solid.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-20">
    <h4>20</h4>
    <p>The standard texts ask what’s the difference between <i>wei</i> and <i>o</i>, which might be translated “yes” and “yessir.” The <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> has <i>wei</i> and <i>ho</i>: “yes” and “no.” This is parallel with the next line (“good and bad” in the standard text, “beautiful and ugly” in the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite>). Here’s a case where the older text surely is correct, the later ones corrupt.</p>
    <p>In the first two lines of the second verse, the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text is perfectly clear: “A person whom everyone fears ought to be feared.” The standard text is strange, obscure: “What the people fear must be feared.” Yet the next lines follow from it as they don’t from the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite>; and after much pondering I followed the standard text.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-23">
    <h4>23</h4>
    <p>In the second verse the word <i>shih</i>, “loss,” gives trouble to all the translators. Waley calls it “the reverse of the power” and “inefficacy,” and Waley’s interpretations are never to be ignored. All the same, I decided to take it not as the opposite of the Way and the power, but as a kind of shadow-Way. Identify yourself with loss, failure, the obscure, the unpossessible, and you’ll be at home even there.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-24">
    <h4>24</h4>
    <p>My version of the first four lines of the second verse doesn’t follow any of the scholarly translations, and is quite unjustified, but at least, unlike them, it makes sense without horrible verbal contortions.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-25">
    <h4>25</h4>
    <p>In all the texts, the fourth verse reads:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So they say: “The Way is great,</span><br/>
        <span>heaven is great,</span><br/>
        <span>earth is great,</span><br/>
        <span>and the king is great.</span><br/>
        <span>Four greatnesses in the world,</span><br/>
        <span>and the king is one of them.”</span>
    </p>
    <p>Yet in the next verse, which is the same series in reverse order, instead of “the king” it’s “the people” or “humanity.” I think a Confucian copyist slipped the king in. The king garbles the sense of the poem and goes against the spirit of the book. I dethroned him.</p>
    <p>The last words of the chapter, <i>tzu jan</i>, which I render “what is,” bear many interpretations. Waley translates them as “the Self-So,” glossing them as “the unconditioned” or “what is so of itself”; Henricks, “what is so on its own”; Lau, “that which is naturally so”; Gibbs-Cheng, “Nature”; Feng-English, “what is natural”; Lafargue, “things as they are.” I came out closest to Lafargue in this case.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-26">
    <h4>26</h4>
    <p>I follow the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text for the third verse, which fits the theme much better than the non-sequitur standard text, “Amid fine sights they sit calm and aloof.” The syntax of the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> also clarifies the last verse, relating it to the last verse of chapter 13.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-27">
    <h4>27</h4>
    <p>The first two lines of the third verse say that the not-good are the <i>t’zu</i>: “the capital” (Carus), or “the charge” (Feng-English), or “the stock in trade” (Waley), or “the raw material” (Henricks) of the good. Lafargue has “the less excellent are material for the excellent,” and Gibbs-Cheng, “mediocre people have the potential to be good people.” The latter two interpretations seemed the most useful to me. And so I call these makings, this raw material, “a student”—somebody learning to be or know better.</p>
    <p>The last lines of the second and third verses are translated in wildly various ways; my “hidden light” and “deep mystery” are justified if, as I believe, Lao Tzu is signaling that his apparently simple statements have complex implications and need thinking about. Of course, this is true of everything in the book.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-28">
    <h4>28</h4>
    <p>“The natural” and “natural wood” are the same word, <i>p’u</i>, which I talked about in the note to chapter 19. Given the amount of cutting up and carving that goes on in the last verse (which seems a kind of footnote to the first three), we really seem to be talking about wood.</p>
    <p>Chinese lends itself to puns, and this last verse is rife with them. Waley says that <i>ch’i</i> (“useful things”) can mean “vessels” or “vassals,” and <i>chih</i> can mean “carving” or “governing.” A great government wouldn’t chop and hack at human nature, trying to make leaders out of sow’s ears. But the paradox of the last two lines surely exceeds any single interpretation.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-29">
    <h4>29</h4>
    <p>The phrase <i>t’ien hsia</i> occurs only in the first verse, where I translate it “the world.” I begin the second verse with the literal translation of it, “under heaven.” I wanted the phrase in the poem as a reminder that the world of these extremes—of hot and cold, weakness and strength, gain and loss—is the sacred object, the place under heaven.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-31">
    <h4>31</h4>
    <p>I have omitted certain lines included by the translators who are my sources and guides. In all the texts, the second verse begins:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A courteous person</span><br/>
        <span>in peacetime honors the left,</span><br/>
        <span>in wartime, the right.</span>
    </p>
    <p>And the last verse begins:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In celebrations the left is the place of honor,</span><br/>
        <span>in mourning the right is the place of honor:</span><br/>
        <span>so lesser officers stand on the left,</span><br/>
        <span>the generalissimo on the right,</span><br/>
        <span>just as they would at a funeral.</span>
    </p>
    <p>I consider these passages to be commentaries or marginal glosses that got copied into the text. J. P. Seaton says, “What were once supports by analogy to common ceremonial practice are now relevant only to the historian.” Here they confuse the clear, powerful statement that culminates in the last four lines. The confusion already existed when the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> version was written, and there seems to be no way of sorting it out now except by radical surgery.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-33">
    <h4>33</h4>
    <p>This chapter sounds like Polonius, incontrovertible but banal, until the last verse, which is a doozer. Here are some other versions of the last six words, <i>Sss erh pu wang che shou</i>:</p>
    <div class="stanza">
        <p>Carus (word for word): “[Who] dies / yet / not / perishes, / the-one / islong-lived [immortal].”</p>
        <p>Carus’s free translation: “One who may die but does not perish has life everlasting.”</p>
        <p>Waley: “When one dies one is not lost; there is no other longevity.”</p>
        <p>Feng-English: “To die but not to perish is to be eternally present.”</p>
        <p>Henricks: “To die but not be forgotten—that’s [true] long life.”</p>
        <p>Bynner: “Vitality cleaves to the marrow / Leaving death behind.”</p>
        <p>Lafargue: “One who dies and does not perish is truly long-lived.”</p>
        <p>Gibbs-Cheng: “One who dies yet still remains has longevity.”</p>
        <p>Lau: “He who lives out his days has had a long life.”</p>
    </div>
    <p>Under J. P. Seaton’s guidance I finally came to feel that I had a handle on the line, and that Lau’s rendition was the most useful. One thing is certain, Lao Tzu is not saying that immortality or even longevity is desirable. The religion called Taoism has spent much imagination on ways to prolong life interminably or gain immortality, and the mythologized Lao Tzu was supposed to have run Methuselah a close race; but the Lao Tzu who wrote this had no truck with such notions.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-36">
    <h4>36</h4>
    <p><i>Wei ming</i>—this phrase in the first line of the second verse (and the chapter title)—is tricky:</p>
    <div class="stanza">
        <p>Carus (word for word): “the secret’s / explanation”;</p>
        <p>Carus’s free translation: “explanation [<i>i.e.</i>, enlightenment] of the secret”</p>
        <p>Feng-English: “perception of the nature of things”</p>
        <p>Gibbs-Cheng: “wonderfully minute and obscure, yet brilliant”</p>
        <p>Lafargue: “subtle clarity”</p>
        <p>Henricks: “subtle light”</p>
        <p>Bynner: “a man with insight”</p>
        <p>Waley: “dimming one’s light”</p>
    </div>
    <p><i>Ming</i> is “light” or “enlightenment.” Waley explains that <i>wei</i> means obscure because very small, and also obscure because dark. I use this second meaning to make an oxymoron.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-37">
    <h4>37</h4>
    <p>The words in the first verse I translate as “the nameless, the natural” and in the next verse as “the unnamed, the unshapen” are the same four words: <i>wu ming chih p’u</i>; more literally, “the naturalness of the unnamed.” “The unnamed” is a key phrase in the first chapter and elsewhere, as is “not wanting,” “unwanting.” <i>P’u</i> is the natural, the uncut wood, or, as Waley glosses it here, “uncarvedwood quality.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-38">
    <h4>38</h4>
    <p>The series here is of familiar Confucian principles: <i>jen, li, i</i>—“good, humane, human-hearted, altruistic”; “righteous, moral, ethical”; “laws, rites, rules, law and order.” But Lao Tzu reverses and subverts the Confucian priorities.</p>
    <p><i>Chien shih</i> in the fourth verse is “premature knowledge” in Carus and “foreknowledge” in Lau, Henricks, and Waley (who explains it as part of Confucian doctrine). Henricks interprets it as having “one’s mind made up before one enters a new situation about what is ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ and ‘proper’ and ‘acceptable’ and so on.” Prejudice, that is, or opinion. Buddhists and Taoists agree in having a very low opinion of opinion.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-39">
    <h4>39</h4>
    <p><i>Yi</i>, “one, the one, unity, singleness, integrity,” is here translated as “whole, wholeness.”</p>
    <p>Waley explains the last two verses as comments on the first three, but their relevance is pretty tenuous. The last verse is very difficult and the translations are various and ingenious. Henricks reads the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text of the first two lines of it as meaning “too many carriages is the same as no carriage,” and I picked up on the idea of multiplicity as opposed to the singleness or wholeness spoken of in the first verses. The meaning of the lines about jade seems to be anybody’s guess.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-41">
    <h4>41</h4>
    <p>I moved the line about perfect whiteness down to keep the three lines about power together, in parallel structure with the three lines about the Way. In the last line of the second verse (and in chapters 21 and 35) I translate <i>hsiang</i> as “thought.” The word connotes “form, shape, image, idea” Waley explains it as the form which is formless, the Tao which can’t be tao’d.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-42">
    <h4>42</h4>
    <p>In the sixth line, does the word <i>fu</i> mean “carry on one’s back” or “turn one’s back on”? Lafargue is the only translator I found that made the second choice. I don’t follow him because I don’t think the “ten thousand things” would or can make the mistake of turning their backs on the yin to embrace only yang. (But a great many of us do make that mistake, which is why Lao Tzu keeps reminding us to value yin, the soft, the dark, the weak, earth, water, the Mother, the Valley.)</p>
    <p>Lafargue’s reading, however, lets the next stanza follow more coherently— orphans, the bereaved, the outcast are what we turn our backs on; winning is yang, losing is yin. Through loss we win…</p>
    <p>The last stanza is uncharacteristic in its didactic tone and in assimilating the teaching to a tradition. Lao Tzu usually cites “what others teach” only to dissociate himself from it. I was inclined to dismiss it as a marginal note by someone who was teaching and annotating the text. But J. P. Seaton, who does teach the text, persuaded me to keep it in the body of the poem, saying, “It’s a message that for all its flat moralism does connect Taoism to Confucianism and even to Buddhism with a single solid thread—averting a hundred holy wars, if nothing else.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-44">
    <h4>44</h4>
    <p>The intense, succinct, beautiful language of the first verses of a poem is sometimes followed by a verse or two in a more didactic tone, smaller in scope, and far more prosaic. I believe some of these verses are additions, comments, and examples, copied into the manuscripts so long ago that they became holy writ. They usually have their own charm and validity, but—as here, and in chapter 39 and other places—they bring a tremendous statement down to a rather commonplace ending. But then, Lao Tzu values the commonplace.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-47">
    <h4>47</h4>
    <p>The last line, literally “not do, yet accomplish,” is a direct statement of one of the fundamental themes of the book. When I came up with a slightly mealy version of it (“doesn’t do, but it’s done”) J. P. Seaton reminded me that “doing without doing is doing, not not doing.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-48">
    <h4>48</h4>
    <p><i>Shi</i> (my “fuss,” Carus’s “diplomacy”) is translated by Lafargue as “work,” by Lau as “meddling,” by Waley and Feng-English as “interference,” by Henricks as “concern,” by Gibbs-Cheng as “act for gain.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-49">
    <h4>49</h4>
    <p>Following some of Carus’s interpretations, the first lines of the third verse might be read, “Wise souls live in the world carefully, handling it carefully, making their mind universal.” I can’t make much sense of any of the other versions except Henricks’s beautiful reading:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As for the Sage’s presence in the world, he is one with it.</span><br/>
        <span>And with the world he merges his mind.</span>
    </p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-50">
    <h4>50</h4>
    <p>Those who read <i>shih yu san</i> as “thirteen,” rather than as “three out of ten,” make better sense of the difficult first verse. The thirteen “companions of life” (Waley, Henricks), which I translate “organs,” may be physical, the limbs and passages and cavities of the body—or physio/psychological, the emotions and sensations.</p>
    <p>My “mad bull” occurs variously as a rhinoceros and a wild buffalo. The idea seems to be a big irritable animal with horns.</p>
    <p>My “live in the right way” is literally “take care of your life,” or “hold on to your life.” The context indicates care without anxiety, holding without grasping. I read the poem as saying that if you can take life as it comes, it doesn’t come at you as your enemy. Lao Tzu’s “nowhere for death to enter” isn’t a promise of invulnerability or immortality; his concern is how to live rightly, how to “live till you die.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-52">
    <h4>52</h4>
    <p>The last two lines of the first verse are the same as the last two lines of chapter 16. I wonder if some of these repetitions were insertions by people studying and copying the book, who were reminded of one poem by another and noted down the relevant lines. They are indeed relevant here, but they don’t fit with perfect inevitability, as they do in chapter 16. This is of course a purely aesthetic judgment, subject to destruction by scholarship at any moment.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-54">
    <h4>54</h4>
    <p>Gibbs and Cheng, finding both the language and the message “discordant with the teachings of Lao Tzu,” won’t even discuss this chapter. Waley’s reading saves it, but the listing “self, family, community, country, empire/world” (a conventional series in ancient Chinese thought), and the list of rules and results is uncharacteristically mechanical. Though he uses many commonplaces, familiar phrases, rhymed sayings, and so on, Lao Tzu’s thought and language are usually more unconventional and unpredictable than this.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-56">
    <h4>56</h4>
    <p>Another repetition: the first four lines of the second verse are the same as the second verse of chapter 4. They carry a different weight here. I vary my translation of them in the fourth line to make it connect to the next.</p>
    <p><i>Hsuan t’ung</i>, “the deep sameness”: <i>hsuan</i> is “deep” or “mysterious”; <i>t’ung</i> is variously translated “identification,” “oneness,” “sameness,” “merging,” “leveling,” “assimilation.” It is an important theme, met with before in chapter 49.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-57">
    <h4>57</h4>
    <p>The phrase “How do I know? By this,” has become a kind of tag by its third repetition; but as Waley points out, it still implies intuitive knowing, beyond reason—knowing the way.</p>
    <p>The words I translate “experts” literally mean “sharp weapons,” but the term implies “pundits, know-it-alls.” I was tempted to say “smart bombs,” which is too cute and topical, but which would certainly lead neatly to the next lines.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-58">
    <h4>58</h4>
    <p>Waley points out that words in the last verse, with such meanings as “square, right, angular,” are typical Confucian virtues. Henricks remarks that all these words and operations refer to carpentry. The verse is about how to cut the uncut wood without cutting it.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-59">
    <h4>59</h4>
    <p><i>Se</i>, my “gather spirit,” is variously translated “frugality,” “moderation,” “restraint,” “being sparing,” or, by Waley, “laying up a store.” Evidently the core idea is that of saving.</p>
    <p>The chapter is usually presented in the manual-for-princes mode. Waley makes sense out of it by complex technical references; other versions make only gleams of sense. To persuade or coerce it into the personal mode meant a more radical interpretation than I usually dare attempt, but Waley’s reading, which points to the symbology of the breath (<i>ch’i</i>) and the “long look” of the meditator, gave me the courage to try. Here is a version closer to the conventional ones:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In controlling people and serving heaven</span><br/>
        <span>it’s best to go easy.</span><br/>
        <span>Going easy from the start</span><br/>
        <span>is to gather power from the start,</span><br/>
        <span>and gathered power keeps you safe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Safe, you can do what you like.</span><br/>
        <span>Do what you like, the country’s yours.</span><br/>
        <span>If you can make the country’s</span><br/>
        <span>Mother yours, you’ll last a long time.</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll have deep roots and a strong trunk.</span><br/>
        <span>The way to live long is to look long.</span>
    </p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-61">
    <h4>61</h4>
    <p>The first seven lines continue the themes of “sameness” or assimilation, and of “being woman,” “being water,” the uses of yin. From there on, the language goes flat, and may be interpolated commentary. There’s an even feebler fourth verse:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A big country needs more people,</span><br/>
        <span>A small one needs more room.</span><br/>
        <span>Each can get what it needs,</span><br/>
        <span>but the big one needs to lie low.</span>
    </p>
    <p>Because the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> texts are older, one longs to see them as more authentic, less corrupt. But though they are invaluable in offering variant readings, some of the variants may themselves be corruptions. In this chapter, the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> reads “Small countries, submitting to a great one, are dominated,” and in the next verse, “Some by lying low stay on top, but some by lying low stay on the bottom.” Both versions are truisms, but the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> version isn’t even a Taoistic truism.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-62">
    <h4>62</h4>
    <p>The first and last verses hang together; the two middle verses are difficult and rather incoherent. Waley says the enigmatic second verse refers to sophists and sages who went about selling their “fine words” to the highest bidder, like our pop gurus and TV pundits.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-64">
    <h4>64</h4>
    <p>I think the advice about being careful at the end of an undertaking was added, perhaps to balance the advice that the right time to act is before the beginning. It confuses the argument a bit, and I put it in parentheses.</p>
    <p>The line I give as “turn back to what people overlooked” is rendered by Lafargue as “turns back to the place all others have gone on from”; FengEnglish, “brings men back to what they have lost”; Henricks, “returns to what the masses have passed by”; Waley, “turning all men back to the things they have left behind.” Each version brings out a different color in the line, like different lights on an opal.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-65">
    <h4>65</h4>
    <p>A dictator and his censors might all too easily cite from this chapter. A democrat might agree that the more people know, the harder they are for a ruler to govern—since the more they know, the better they are at governing themselves. Anyone might agree that an intellectual agenda pursued without reality-checking is indeed a curse upon the land. From the divine right of kings through the deadly teachings of Hitler and Mao to the mumbojumbo of economists, government by theory has done endless ill. But why is Lao Tzu’s alternative to it a people kept in ignorance? What kind of ignorance? Ignorance of what? Lao Tzu may be signalling us to ask such questions when he speaks of “understanding these things.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-69">
    <h4>69</h4>
    <p>Waley is my guide to the interpretation of the second verse, but I make very free with the last two lines of it. If they aren’t a rather vapid statement that one should never underestimate one’s foe, they must follow from what went before and lead to the extraordinary last verse. It all comes down to the last line and the word <i>shwai</i>. Carus translates it as “the weaker [the more compassionate],” and Bynner uses the word “compassion.” Waley translates it as “he who does not delight in war,” Henricks as “the one who feels grief,” Gibbs-Cheng as “the one stung by grief,” Feng-English as “the underdog,” Lafargue as “the one in mourning.” A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-71">
    <h4>71</h4>
    <p>I follow Henricks in choosing the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text, which has a double negative in the second line. Most other texts have “not knowing knowing is sickness.”</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-72">
    <h4>72</h4>
    <p>I take the liberty of reading this chapter as a description of what we, we ordinary people, should fear. The usual reading is in the manual-for-princes mode. In that case “what should be feared” is the ruler, the rightful authority, and the advice that follows is evidently directed to that ruler. It’s certainly what William Blake would have told the oligarchs of the Industrial Revolution, who still control our lives:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When people don’t fear what should be feared</span><br/>
        <span>they are in fearful danger.</span><br/>
        <span>Don’t make them live in narrow houses,</span><br/>
        <span>don’t force them to do stupid work.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When they’re not made stupid</span><br/>
        <span>they won’t act stupidly.</span>
    </p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-74">
    <h4>74</h4>
    <p>I follow the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text, but make very free with the word Henricks renders as “constant [in their behavior].” If I understand Henricks’ version, it says that if people were consistent in behaving normally and in fearing death, and if death were the penalty for abnormal behavior, nobody would dare behave abnormally; and so there would be no executions and no executioners. But this is not the case; as Lao Tzu says, there are times when even normal people lose their normal fear of death. So what is the poem about? I read it as saying that since we are inconsistent both in our behavior and in our fear of death, no person can rightfully take on the role of executioner, and should leave the death penalty to the judgment of heaven or nature.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-80">
    <h4>80</h4>
    <p>To dismiss this Utopia as simply regressivist or anti-technological is to miss an interesting point. These people have labor-saving machinery, ships and land vehicles, weapons of offense and defense. They “have them and don’t use them.” I interpret: they aren’t used by them. We’re used, our lives shaped and controlled, by our machines, cars, planes, weaponry, bulldozers, computers. These Taoists don’t surrender their power to their creations.</p>
    <p>The eleventh line, however, is certainly regressive if it says knotted cords are to replace written literature, history, mathematics, and so on. It might be read as saying it’s best not to externalize all our thinking and remembering (as we do in writing and reading), but to keep it embodied, to think and remember with our bodies as well as our verbalizing brains.</p>
</div>

<div epub:type="endnote" id="en-81">
    <h4>81</h4>
    <p>This last poem is self-reflexive, wrapping it all up tight in the first verse, then opening out again to praise the undestructive, uncompetitive generosity of the spirit that walks on the Way.</p>
    <p>To my mind, the best reason for following the <cite>Ma wang tui</cite> text in reversing the order of the books is that the whole thing ends with a chapter (37) that provides a nobler conclusion than this one. But if you reverse the order, chapter 1 turns up in the middle of the book, and I simply cannot believe that that’s right. That poem is a beginning. It is the beginning.</p>
</div>
</section>

<section epub:type="introduction">
    <h2 class="chapter">Introduction</h2>
    <p>The <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> was probably written about twenty-five hundred years ago, perhaps by a man called Lao Tzu, who may have lived at about the same time as Confucius. Nothing about it is certain except that it’s Chinese, and very old, and speaks to people everywhere as if it had been written yesterday.</p>
    <p>The first <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> I ever saw was the Paul Carus edition of 1898, bound in yellow cloth stamped with blue and red Chinese designs and characters. It was a venerable object of mystery, which I soon investigated, and found more fascinating inside than out. The book was my father’s; he read in it often. Once I saw him making notes from it and asked what he was doing. He said he was marking which chapters he’d like to have read at his funeral. We did read those chapters at his memorial service.</p>
    <p>I have the book, now ninety-eight years old and further ornamented with red binding-tape to hold the back on, and have marked which chapters I’d like to have read at my funeral. In the Notes, I explain why I was so lucky to discover Lao Tzu in that particular edition. Here I will only say that I was lucky to discover him so young, so that I could live with his book my whole life long.</p>
    <p>I also discuss other aspects of my version in the Notes—the how of it. Here I want to state very briefly the why of it.</p>
    <p>The <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> is partly in prose, partly in verse; but as we define poetry now, not by rhyme and meter but as a patterned intensity of language, the whole thing is poetry. I wanted to catch that poetry, its terse, strange beauty. Most translations have caught meanings in their net, but prosily, letting the beauty slip through. And in poetry, beauty is no ornament; it is the meaning. It is the truth. We have that on good authority.</p>
    <p>Scholarly translations of the <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> as a manual for rulers use a vocabulary that emphasizes the uniqueness of the Taoist “sage,” his masculinity, his authority. This language is perpetuated, and degraded, in most popular versions. I wanted a Book of the Way accessible to a present-day, unwise, unpowerful, and perhaps unmale reader, not seeking esoteric secrets, but listening for a voice that speaks to the soul. I would like that reader to see why people have loved the book for twenty-five hundred years.</p>
    <p>It is the most lovable of all the great religious texts, funny, keen, kind, modest, indestructibly outrageous, and inexhaustibly refreshing. Of all the deep springs, this is the purest water. To me, it is also the deepest spring.</p>
    <p class="r i">—Ursula K. Le Guin</p>
</section>

<section epub:type="preface">
    <h2 class="chapter">Preface</h2>
    <p>This is a rendition, not a translation. I do not know any Chinese. I could approach the text at all only because Paul Carus, in his 1898 translation of the <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite>, printed the Chinese text with each character followed by a transliteration and a translation. My gratitude to him is unending.</p>
    <p>To have the text thus made accessible was not only to have a Rosetta Stone for the book itself, but also to have a touchstone for comparing other English translations one with another. If I could focus on which word the translators were interpreting, I could begin to understand why they made the choice they did. I could compare various interpretations and see why they varied so tremendously; could see how much explanation, sometimes how much bias, was included in the translation; could discover for myself that several English meanings might lead me back to the same Chinese word. And, finally, for all my ignorance of the language, I could gain an intuition of the style, the gait and cadence, of the original, necessary to my ear and conscience if I was to try to reproduce it in English.</p>
    <p>Without the access to the text that the Carus edition gave me, I would have been defeated by the differences among the translations, and could never have thought of following them as guides towards a version of my own. As it was, working from Carus’s text, I learned how to let them lead me into it, always using their knowledge, their scholarship, their decisions, as my light in darkness.</p>
    <p>When you try to follow the Way, even if you wander off it all the time, good things happen though you do not deserve them. My work on the <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> was very wandering indeed. I started in my twenties with a few chapters. Every decade or so I’d do another bit, and tell myself I’d sit down and really get to it, some day. The undeserved good thing that happened was that a true and genuine scholar of ancient Chinese and of Lao Tzu, Dr. J. P. Seaton of the University of North Carolina, saw some of my versions of bits of the <cite>Tao Te Ching</cite> (scurvily quoted without attribution by myself). He reprinted them with honor, and asked me for more. I do not think he knew what he was getting into. Of his invaluable teaching, his encouragement, his generosity, I can say only what Lao Tzu says at the end of the book:</p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Wise souls don’t hoard;</span><br/>
        <span>the more they do for others the more they have,</span><br/>
        <span>the more they give the richer they are.</span>
    </p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
