<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>Tao Te Ching</title>
    <meta name="author" content="Lao Tzu"/>
    <meta name="translator" content="Robert G. Henricks"/>
    <meta name="year" content="1989"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <link href="../local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-01">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As for the Way, the Way that can be spoken of is not the constant Way;</span><br/>
        <span>As for names, the name that can be named is not the constant name.</span><br/>
        <span>The nameless is the beginning of the ten thousand things;</span><br/>
        <span>The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, those constantly without desires, by this means will perceive its subtlety.</span><br/>
        <span>Those constantly with desires, by this means will see only that which they yearn for and seek.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These two together emerge;</span><br/>
        <span>They have different names yet they’re called the same;</span><br/>
        <span>That which is even more profound that the profound—</span><br/>
        <span>The gateway of all subtleties.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-02">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When everyone in the world knows the beautiful as beautiful, ugliness comes into being;</span><br/>
        <span>When everyone knows the good, then the not good comes to be.</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual production of being and nonbeing,</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual completion of difficult and easy,</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual formation of long and short,</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual filling of high and low,</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual harmony of tone and voice,</span><br/>
        <span>The mutual following of front and back—</span><br/>
        <span>These are all constants.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage dwells in nonactive affairs and practices the wordless teaching.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things arise, but he doesn’t begin them;</span><br/>
        <span>He acts on their behalf, but he doesn’t make them dependent;</span><br/>
        <span>He accomplishes his tasks, but he doesn’t dwell on them;</span><br/>
        <span>It is only because he doesn’t dwell on them, that they therefore do not leave them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-03">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>By not elevating the worthy, you bring it about that people will not compete.</span><br/>
        <span>By not valuing goods that are hard to obtain, you bring it about that people will not act like thieves.</span><br/>
        <span>By not displaying the desirable you bring it about that people will not be confused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, in the government of the Sage:</span><br/>
        <span>He empties their minds,</span><br/>
        <span>An fills their bellies.</span><br/>
        <span>Weakens their ambition,</span><br/>
        <span>And strengthens their bones.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He constantly causes the people to be without knowledge and without desires.</span><br/>
        <span>If he can bring it about that those with knowledge simply do not dare to act,</span><br/>
        <span>Then there is nothing that will not be in order.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-04">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way is empty;</span><br/>
        <span>Yet when you use it, you never need fill it again.</span><br/>
        <span>Like an abyss! It seems to be the ancestor of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If files down sharp edges;</span><br/>
        <span>Unties the tangles;</span><br/>
        <span>Softens the glare;</span><br/>
        <span>And settles the dust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Submerged! It seems perhaps to exist.</span><br/>
        <span>We don’t know whose child it is;</span><br/>
        <span>It seems to have [even] preceded the Lord.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-05">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and Earth are not humane;</span><br/>
        <span>They regard the the thousand things as straw dogs.</span><br/>
        <span>The Sage is not humane;</span><br/>
        <span>He regards the common people as straw dogs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The space between Heaven and Earth—is it not like a bellow?</span><br/>
        <span>It is empty and yet not depleted;</span><br/>
        <span>Move it and more [always] comes out.</span><br/>
        <span>Much learning means frequent exhaustions.</span><br/>
        <span>That’s not so good as holding on to the mean.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-06">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The valley spirit never dies;</span><br/>
        <span>We call it the mysterious female.</span><br/>
        <span>The gates of the mysterious female—</span><br/>
        <span>These we call the roots of Heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>Subtle yet everlasting! It seems to exist.</span><br/>
        <span>In being used, it is not exhausted.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-07">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven endures; Earth lasts a long time.</span><br/>
        <span>The reason why Heaven and Earth can endure and last a long time—</span><br/>
        <span>Is that they do not live for themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they can long endure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage:</span><br/>
        <span>Puts himself in the background yet finds himself in the foreground;</span><br/>
        <span>Puts self-concern out of [his mind], yet finds self-concern in the fore;</span><br/>
        <span>Puts self-concern out of [his mind], yet finds that his self-concern is preserved.</span><br/>
        <span>Is it not because he has no self-interest,</span><br/>
        <span>That he is therefore able to realize his self-interest?</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-08">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The highest good is like water;</span><br/>
        <span>Water is good at benefiting the ten thousand things and yet it [does not] compete [with them].</span><br/>
        <span>It dwells in places the masses of people detest,</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore it is close to the Way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In dwelling, the good thing is the land;</span><br/>
        <span>In the mind, the good thing is depth;</span><br/>
        <span>In giving, the good thing is [being like] Heaven;</span><br/>
        <span>In speaking, the good thing is sincerity;</span><br/>
        <span>In governing, the good thing is order;</span><br/>
        <span>In affairs, the good thing is ability;</span><br/>
        <span>In activity, the good thing is timeliness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is only because it does not compete, that therefore it is without fault.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-09">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To hold it upright and fill it,</span><br/>
        <span>Is not so good as stopping [in time].</span><br/>
        <span>When you pound it out and give it a point,</span><br/>
        <span>It won’t be preserved very long.</span><br/>
        <span>When gold and jade fill your rooms,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll never be able to protect them.</span><br/>
        <span>Arrogance and pride with wealth and rank,</span><br/>
        <span>On their own bring on disaster.</span><br/>
        <span>When the deed is accomplished you retire;</span><br/>
        <span>Such is Heaven’s Way!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-10">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In nourishing the soul and embracing the One—can you do it without letting them leave?</span><br/>
        <span>In concentrating your breath and making it soft—can you [make it like that of] a child?</span><br/>
        <span>In cultivating and cleaning your profound mirror—can you do it so that it has no blemish?</span><br/>
        <span>In loving the people and giving life to the state—can you do it without using knowledge?</span><br/>
        <span>In opening and closing the gates of Heaven—can you play the part of the female?</span><br/>
        <span>In understanding all within the four reaches—can you do it without using knowledge?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give birth to them and nourish them.</span><br/>
        <span>Give birth to them but don’t try to own them;</span><br/>
        <span>Help them to grow but don’t rule them.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called Profound Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-11">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thirty spokes unite in one hub;</span><br/>
        <span>It is precisely where there is nothing, that we find the usefulness of the wheel.</span><br/>
        <span>We fire clay and make vessels;</span><br/>
        <span>It is precisely where there’s no substance, that we find the usefulness of clay pots.</span><br/>
        <span>We chisel out doors and windows;</span><br/>
        <span>It is precisely in these empty spaces, that we find the usefulness of the room.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, we regard having something as beneficial;</span><br/>
        <span>But having nothing as useful.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-12">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The five colors cause one’s eyes to go blind.</span><br/>
        <span>Racing horses and hunting cause one’s mind to go mad.</span><br/>
        <span>Goods that are hard to obtain pose an obstacle to one’s travels.</span><br/>
        <span>The five flavors confuse one’s palate.</span><br/>
        <span>The five tones cause one’s ears to go deaf.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, in the government of the Sage:</span><br/>
        <span>He’s for the belly and not for the eyes.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus he rejects that and take this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-13">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>“Regard favor and disgrace with alarm.”</span><br/>
        <span>“Respect great distress as you do your own person.”</span><br/>
        <span>What do I mean I say “Regard favor and disgrace with alarm”?</span><br/>
        <span>Favor is inferior.</span><br/>
        <span>If you get it—be alarmed!</span><br/>
        <span>If you lose it—be alarmed!</span><br/>
        <span>This is what I mean when I say “Regard favor and disgrace with alarm.”</span><br/>
        <span>What do I mean when I say “Respect great distress as you do your won person”?</span><br/>
        <span>The reason why I have distress</span><br/>
        <span>Is that I have a body.</span><br/>
        <span>If I had no body, what distress would I have?</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, to one who values acting for himself over acting on behalf of the world,</span><br/>
        <span>You can entrust the world.</span><br/>
        <span>And to one who in being parsimonious regards his person as equal to the world,</span><br/>
        <span>You can turn over the world.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-14">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>We look at it but do not see it;</span><br/>
        <span>We name this “the minute.”</span><br/>
        <span>We listen to it but do not hear it;</span><br/>
        <span>We name this “the rarefied.”</span><br/>
        <span>We touch it but do not hold it;</span><br/>
        <span>We name this “the level and smooth.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These three cannot be examined to the limit.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus they merge together as one.</span><br/>
        <span>“One”—there is nothing more encompassing above it,</span><br/>
        <span>And nothing smaller below it.</span><br/>
        <span>Boundless, formless! It cannot be named,</span><br/>
        <span>And returns to the state of no-thing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called the formless form,</span><br/>
        <span>The substanceless image.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the subtle and indistinct.</span><br/>
        <span>Follow it and you won’t see its back;</span><br/>
        <span>Greet it and you won’t see its head.</span><br/>
        <span>Hold on to the Way of the present—</span><br/>
        <span>To manage the things of the present,</span><br/>
        <span>And to know the ancient beginning.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the beginning of the thread of the Way.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-15">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The one who was skilled at practicing the Way in antiquity,</span><br/>
        <span>Was subtle and profound, mysterious and penetratingly wise.</span><br/>
        <span>His depth cannot be known.</span><br/>
        <span>It is only because he cannot be known</span><br/>
        <span>That therefore were I forced to describe him I’d say:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hesitant was he! Like someone crossing a river in winter.</span><br/>
        <span>Undecided was he! As though in fear of his neighbors on all four sides.</span><br/>
        <span>Solemn and polite was he! Like a guest.</span><br/>
        <span>Scattered and dispersed was he! Like an ice as it melts</span><br/>
        <span>Genuine, unformed was he! Like uncarved wood.</span><br/>
        <span>Merged, undifferentiated was he! Like muddy water.</span><br/>
        <span>Broad and expansive was he! Like a valley.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you take muddy water and still it, it gradually becomes clear.</span><br/>
        <span>If you bring something to rest in order to move it, it gradually comes alive.</span><br/>
        <span>The one who preserved this Way does not desire to be full;</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore he can wear out with no need to be renewed.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-16">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Take emptiness to the limit;</span><br/>
        <span>Maintain tranquility in the center.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things—side-by-side they arise;</span><br/>
        <span>And by this I see their return.</span><br/>
        <span>Things [come forth] in great numbers;</span><br/>
        <span>Each one returns to its root.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called tranquility.</span><br/>
        <span>“Tranquility”—This means to return to your fate.</span><br/>
        <span>To return to your fate is to be constant;</span><br/>
        <span>To know the constant is to be wise.</span><br/>
        <span>Not to know the constant is to be reckless and wild;</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re reckless and wild, your actions will lead to misfortune.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know the constant is to be all-embracing;</span><br/>
        <span>To be all-embracing is to be impartial;</span><br/>
        <span>To be impartial is to be kingly;</span><br/>
        <span>To be kingly is to be [like] Heaven;</span><br/>
        <span>To be [like] Heaven is to be [one with] the Dao;</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re [one with] the Dao, to the end of your days you’ll suffer no harm.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-17">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>With the highest [kind of rulers], those below simply know they exist.</span><br/>
        <span>With those one step down—they love and praise them.</span><br/>
        <span>With those one further step down—they fear them.</span><br/>
        <span>And with those at the bottom—they ridicule and insult them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When trust is insufficient, there will be no trust [in them].</span><br/>
        <span>Hesitant, undecided! Like this is his respect for speaking.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-18">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, when the Great Way is rejected, it is then that we have the virtues of humanity and righteousness;</span><br/>
        <span>When knowledge and wisdom appear, it is then that there is great hypocrisy;</span><br/>
        <span>When the six relations are not in harmony, it is then that we have filial piety and compassion;</span><br/>
        <span>And when the country is in chaos and confusion, it is then that there are virtuous officials.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-19">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Eliminate sageliness, throw away knowledge,</span><br/>
        <span>And the people will benefit a hundredfold.</span><br/>
        <span>Eliminate humanity, throw away righteousness,</span><br/>
        <span>And the people will return to filial piety and compassion.</span><br/>
        <span>Eliminate craftiness, throw away profit,</span><br/>
        <span>Then we will have no robbers and thieves.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These three sayings—</span><br/>
        <span>Regard as a text are not yet complete.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, we must see to it that they have the following appended:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Manifest plainness and embrace the genuine;</span><br/>
        <span>Lessen self-interest and make few your desires;</span><br/>
        <span>Eliminate learning and have no undue concern.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-20">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Agreement and angry rejection;</span><br/>
        <span>How great is the difference between them?</span><br/>
        <span>Beautiful and ugly;</span><br/>
        <span>What’s it like—the difference between them?</span><br/>
        <span>The one who is feared by others,</span><br/>
        <span>Must also because of this fear other men.</span><br/>
        <span>Wild, unrestrained! It will never come to an end!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The multitudes are peaceful and happy;</span><br/>
        <span>Like climbing a terrace in springtime to feast at the tai-lao sacrifice.</span><br/>
        <span>But I’m tranquil and quiet—not yet having given any sign.</span><br/>
        <span>Like a child who has not yet smiled.</span><br/>
        <span>Tired and exhausted—as though I have no place to return.</span><br/>
        <span>The multitudes all have a surplus.</span><br/>
        <span>I alone seem to be lacking.</span><br/>
        <span>Mine is the mind of a fool—ignorant and stupid!</span><br/>
        <span>The common people see things clearly;</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am in the dark.</span><br/>
        <span>The common people discriminate and make fine distinctions;</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am muddled and confused.</span><br/>
        <span>Formless am I! Like the ocean;</span><br/>
        <span>Shapeless am I! As though I have nothing in which I can rest.</span><br/>
        <span>The masses all have their reasons [for acting];</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am stupid and obstinate like a rustic.</span><br/>
        <span>But my desires alone differ from those of others—</span><br/>
        <span>For I value drawing sustenance from the Mother.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-21">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The character of great virtue follows alone from the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>As for the nature of the Way—it’s shapeless and formless.</span><br/>
        <span>Formless! Shapeless! Inside there are images.</span><br/>
        <span>Shapeless! Formless! Inside there are things.</span><br/>
        <span>Hidden! Obscure! Inside there are essences.</span><br/>
        <span>These essences are very real;</span><br/>
        <span>Inside them is the proof.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>From the present back to the past,</span><br/>
        <span>Its name has never gone away.</span><br/>
        <span>It is by this that we comply with the father of the multitude [of things].</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know that the father of the multitude is so?</span><br/>
        <span>By this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-22">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Bent over, you’ll be preserved whole;</span><br/>
        <span>When twisted, you’ll be upright;</span><br/>
        <span>When hollowed out, you’ll be full;</span><br/>
        <span>When worn out, you’ll be renewed;</span><br/>
        <span>When you have little, you’ll attain [much];</span><br/>
        <span>With much, you’ll be confused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage holds on to the One and in this way becomes the shepherd of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not show himself off; therefore he becomes prominent.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not put himself on display; therefore he brightly shines.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not brag about himself; therefore he receives credit.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not praise his own deeds; therefore he can long endure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is only because he does not compete that, therefore, no one is able to compete with him.</span><br/>
        <span>The so-called “Bent over you’ll be preserved whole” of the ancients</span><br/>
        <span>Was an expression that was really close to it!</span><br/>
        <span>Truly “wholeness” will belong to him.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-23">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To rarely speak—such is [the way of] Nature.</span><br/>
        <span>Fierce winds don’t last the whole morning;</span><br/>
        <span>Torrential rains don’t last the whole day.</span><br/>
        <span>Who makes these things?</span><br/>
        <span>If even Heaven and Earth can’t make these last long—</span><br/>
        <span>How much the more is this true for man?!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, one who devotes himself to the Way is one with the Way;</span><br/>
        <span>One who [devotes himself to] Virtue is one with that Virtue;</span><br/>
        <span>And one who [devotes himself to] losing is one with that loss.</span><br/>
        <span>To the one who is one with Virtue, the Way also gives Virtue;</span><br/>
        <span>While for the one who is one with his loss, the Way also disregards him.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-24">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>One who boasts is not established;</span><br/>
        <span>One who shows himself off does not become prominent;</span><br/>
        <span>One who puts himself on display does not brightly shine;</span><br/>
        <span>One who brags about himself gests no credit;</span><br/>
        <span>One who praises himself does not long endure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the Way, such things are called:</span><br/>
        <span>“Surplus food and redundant action.”</span><br/>
        <span>And with things—there are those who hate them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the one with the Way in them does not dwell.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-25">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There was something formed out of chaos,</span><br/>
        <span>That was born before Heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>Quiet and Still! Pure and deep!</span><br/>
        <span>It stands on its own and does not change.</span><br/>
        <span>It can be regarded as the mother of Heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>I do not yet know its name:</span><br/>
        <span>I “style” it “the Way.”</span><br/>
        <span>Were I forced to give it a name, I would call it “the Great.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>“Great” means “to depart”;</span><br/>
        <span>“To depart” means “to be far away”;</span><br/>
        <span>And “to be far away” means “to return.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way is great;</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven is great;</span><br/>
        <span>Earth is great;</span><br/>
        <span>And the king is also great.</span><br/>
        <span>In the country there are four greats, and the king occupies one place among them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Man models himself on the Earth;</span><br/>
        <span>The Earth models itself on Heaven;</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven models itself on the Way;</span><br/>
        <span>And the Way models itself on that which is so on its own.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-26">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The heavy is the root of the light;</span><br/>
        <span>Tranquility is the loard of agitation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the gentleman, in traveling all day, does not get far away from his luggage carts.</span><br/>
        <span>When he’s safely inside a walled-in [protected] hostel and resting at ease—only then does he transcend all concern.</span><br/>
        <span>How can the king of ten thousand chariots treat his own person more lightly than the whole world?!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you regard things too lightly, then you lose the basic;</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re agitated, you lose the “lord.”</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-27">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The good traveler leaves no track behind;</span><br/>
        <span>The good speaker [speaks] without blemish or flaw;</span><br/>
        <span>The good counter doesn’t use tallies or chips;</span><br/>
        <span>The good closer of doors does so without bolt or lock, and yet the door cannot be opened;</span><br/>
        <span>The good tier of knots ties without rope or cord, yet his knots can’t be undone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage is constantly good at saving men and never rejects anyone;</span><br/>
        <span>And with things, he never rejects useful goods.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called Doubly Bright.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the good man is the teacher of the good,</span><br/>
        <span>And the bad man is the raw material for the good.</span><br/>
        <span>To not value one’s teacher and not cherish the raw goods—</span><br/>
        <span>Though one had great knowledge, he would still be greatly confused.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the Essential of the Sublime.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-28">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you know the male yet hold on to the female,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll be the ravine of the country.</span><br/>
        <span>When you’re the ravine of the country,</span><br/>
        <span>Your constant virtue will not leave.</span><br/>
        <span>And when your constant virtue doesn’t leave,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll return to the state of the infant.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you know the pure yet hold on to the soiled,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll be the valley of the country.</span><br/>
        <span>When you’re the valley of the country,</span><br/>
        <span>Your constant virtue is complete.</span><br/>
        <span>And when your constant virtue is complete,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll return to the state of uncarved wood.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you know the white yet hold on to the black,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll be the model for the country.</span><br/>
        <span>And when you’re the model for the country,</span><br/>
        <span>Your constant virtue will not go astray.</span><br/>
        <span>And when your constant virtue does not go astray,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll return to the condition which has no limit.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When uncarved wood is cut up, it’s turned into vessels;</span><br/>
        <span>When the Sage is used, he becomes the Head of Officials.</span><br/>
        <span>Truly, great carving is done without splitting up.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-29">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For those who would like to take control of thw world and act on it—</span><br/>
        <span>I see that with this they simply will not succeed.</span><br/>
        <span>The world is a sacred vessel;</span><br/>
        <span>It is not something that can be acted upon.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who act on it destroy it;</span><br/>
        <span>Those who hold on to it lose it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>With things—some go forward, others follow;</span><br/>
        <span>Some are hot, others submissive and weak;</span><br/>
        <span>Some rise up while others fall down.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage:</span><br/>
        <span>Rejects the extreme, the excessive, and the extravagant.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-30">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who assist their rulers with the Way,</span><br/>
        <span>Don’t use weapons to commit violence in the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Such deeds easily rebound.</span><br/>
        <span>In places where armies are stationed, thorns and brambles will grow.</span><br/>
        <span>The good [general] achieves his result and that’s all;</span><br/>
        <span>He does not use the occasion to seize strength from it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He achieves his result but does not become arrogant;</span><br/>
        <span>He achieves his result but does not praise his deeds;</span><br/>
        <span>He achieves his result and yet does not brag.</span><br/>
        <span>He achieves his result, yet he abides with the result because he has no choice.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called achieving one’s result [without] using force.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When things reach their primes, they get old;</span><br/>
        <span>We called this “not the Way.”</span><br/>
        <span>What is not the Way will come to an early end.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-31">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As for weapons—they are instruments of ill omen.</span><br/>
        <span>And among things there are those that hate them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the one who has the Way, with them does not dwell.</span><br/>
        <span>When the gentleman is at home, he honors the left;</span><br/>
        <span>When at war, he honors the right.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, weapons are not the instrument of the gentleman—</span><br/>
        <span>Weapons are instruments of ill omen.</span><br/>
        <span>When you have no choice but to use them, it’s best to remain tranquil and calm.</span><br/>
        <span>You should never look upon them as things of beauty.</span><br/>
        <span>If you see them as beautiful things—this is to delight in the killing of men.</span><br/>
        <span>And when you delight in the killing of men, you’ll not realize your goal in the land.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, in happy events we honor the left,</span><br/>
        <span>But in mourning we honor the right.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the lieutenant general stands on the left;</span><br/>
        <span>And the supreme general stands on the right.</span><br/>
        <span>Which is to say, they arrange themselves as they would at a funeral.</span><br/>
        <span>When multitudes of people are killed, we stand before them in sorrow and grief.</span><br/>
        <span>When we’re victorious in battle, we treat the occasion like a funeral ceremony.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-32">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Dao is constantly nameless.</span><br/>
        <span>Though in its natural state it seems small, no one in the world dares to treat it as a subject.</span><br/>
        <span>Were marquises and kings able to maintain it,</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things would submit to them on their own,</span><br/>
        <span>And Heaven and Earth would unite to send forth sweet dew.</span><br/>
        <span>By nature it would fall equally on all things, with no one among the people ordering that it be so.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As soon as we start to establish a system, we have names.</span><br/>
        <span>And as soon as there are set names,</span><br/>
        <span>Then you must also know that it’s time to stop.</span><br/>
        <span>By knowing to stop—in this way you’ll come to no harm.</span><br/>
        <span>The Way’s presence in the world</span><br/>
        <span>Is like the relationship of small valley [streams] to rivers and seas.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-33">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To understand others is to be knowledgeable;</span><br/>
        <span>To understand yourself is to be wise.</span><br/>
        <span>To conquer others is to have strength;</span><br/>
        <span>To conquer yourself is to be strong.</span><br/>
        <span>To know when you have enough is to be rich.</span><br/>
        <span>To go forward with strength is to have ambition.</span><br/>
        <span>To not lose your place is to last long.</span><br/>
        <span>To die but not be forgotten—that’s [true] long life.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-34">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way floats and drifts;</span><br/>
        <span>It can go left or right.</span><br/>
        <span>It accomplishes its tasks and completes its affairs, and yet for this it is not given a name.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it, and yet it does not act as their master.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus it is constantly without desires.</span><br/>
        <span>It can be named with the things that are small.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it, and yet it does not act as their master.</span><br/>
        <span>It can be named with the things that are great.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage’s ability to accomplish the great</span><br/>
        <span>Comes from his not playing the role of the great.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore he is able to accomplish the great.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-35">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hold on to the Great Image and the whole world will come to you.</span><br/>
        <span>Come to you and suffer no harm; but rather know great safety and peace.</span><br/>
        <span>Music and food—for these passing travelers stop.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, of the Dao’s speaking, we say:</span><br/>
        <span>Insipid, it is! It’s lack of flavor.</span><br/>
        <span>When you look at it, it’s not sufficient to be seen;</span><br/>
        <span>When you listen to it, it’s not sufficient to be heard;</span><br/>
        <span>Yet when you use it, it can’t be used up.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-36">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you wish to shrink it,</span><br/>
        <span>You must certainly stretch it.</span><br/>
        <span>If you wish to weaken it,</span><br/>
        <span>You must certainly strengthen it.</span><br/>
        <span>If you wish to desert it,</span><br/>
        <span>You must certainly work closely with it.</span><br/>
        <span>If you wish to snatch something from it,</span><br/>
        <span>You must certainly give something to it.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the Subtle Light.</span><br/>
        <span>The submissive and weak conquer the strong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fish should not be taken out of the depths;</span><br/>
        <span>The state’s sharp weapons should not be shown to the people.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-37">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Dao is constantly nameless.</span><br/>
        <span>Were Marquises and kings able to maintain it,</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things would transform on their own.</span><br/>
        <span>Having transformed, were their desires to become active,</span><br/>
        <span>I would subdue them with the nameless simplicity.</span><br/>
        <span>Having subdued them with the nameless simplicity,</span><br/>
        <span>I would not disgrace them.</span><br/>
        <span>By not being disgraced, they will be tranquil.</span><br/>
        <span>And Heaven and Earth will of themselves be correct and right.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-38">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The highest virtue is not virtuous; therefore it truly has virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>The lowest virtue never loses sight of its virtue; therefore it has no true virtue.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The highest virtue takes no action, yet it has no reason for acting this way;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest humanity takes action, yet it has no reason for acting this way;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest righteousness takes action, and it has its reason for acting this way;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest propriety takes action, and when no one responds to it, then it angrily rolls up its sleeves and forces people to comply.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, when the Way is lost, only then do we have virtue;</span><br/>
        <span>When virtue is lost, only then do we have humanity;</span><br/>
        <span>When humanity is lost, only then do we have righteousness;</span><br/>
        <span>And when righteousness is lost, only then do we have propriety.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As for propriety, it’s but the thin edge of loyalty and sincerity, and the beginning of disorder.</span><br/>
        <span>And foreknowledge is but the flower of the Way, and the beginning of stupidity.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Great Man</span><br/>
        <span>Dwells in the thick and doesn’t dwell in the thin;</span><br/>
        <span>Dwells in the fruit and doesn’t dwell in the flower.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, he rejects that and takes this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-39">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Of those in the past that attained the One—</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven, by attaining the One became clear;</span><br/>
        <span>Earth, by attaining the One became stable;</span><br/>
        <span>Gods, by attaining the One became divine;</span><br/>
        <span>Valley, by attaining the One became full;</span><br/>
        <span>Marquises and kings, by attaining the One made the whole land ordered and secure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Taking this to its logical conclusion we would say—</span><br/>
        <span>If Heaven were not by means of it clear, it would, I’m afraid, shatter;</span><br/>
        <span>If the Earth were not by means of it stable, it would, I’m afraid, let go.</span><br/>
        <span>If the gods were not by means of it divine, they would, I’m afraid, be powerless.</span><br/>
        <span>If valley were not by means of it full, they would, [I’m afraid,] dry up.</span><br/>
        <span>And if marquises and kings were not by means of it noble and high, they would, I’m afraid, topple and fall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, it must be the case that the noble has the base as its root;</span><br/>
        <span>And it must be the case that the high has the low for its foundation.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, for this reason, marquises and kings call themselves “The Orphan,” “The Widower,” and “The One Without Grain.”</span><br/>
        <span>This is taking the base as one’s root, is it not?!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, they regard their large numbers of carriages as having no carriage.</span><br/>
        <span>And because of this, they desire not to dazzle and glitter like jade,</span><br/>
        <span>But to remain firm and strong like stone.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-40">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>“Reversal” is the movement of the Dao;</span><br/>
        <span>“Weakness” is the function of the Dao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The things of the world originate in being,</span><br/>
        <span>And being originates in nonbeing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-41">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the highest type of men hear the Way, with diligence thye’re able to practice it;</span><br/>
        <span>When the average men hear the Way, some things they retain and others they lose;</span><br/>
        <span>When the lowest type of men hear the Way, they laugh out loud at it.</span><br/>
        <span>If they didn’t laught at it, it couldn’t be regarded as the Way.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, there is a set saying about this that goes:</span><br/>
        <span>The bright Way appears to be dark;</span><br/>
        <span>The Way that goes forward appears to retreat;</span><br/>
        <span>The smooth Way appears to be uneven;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest virtue [is empty] like a valley;</span><br/>
        <span>The purest white appears to be soiled;</span><br/>
        <span>Vast virtue appears to be insufficient;</span><br/>
        <span>Firm virtue appears thin and weak;</span><br/>
        <span>The simplest reality appears to change.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Great Square has no corners;</span><br/>
        <span>The Great Vessel takes long to complete;</span><br/>
        <span>The Great Tone makes little sound;</span><br/>
        <span>The Great Image has no shape.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way is Great but has no name.</span><br/>
        <span>Only the Way is good at beginning things and also good at bringing things to completion.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-42">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way gave birth to the One.</span><br/>
        <span>The One gave birth to the Two.</span><br/>
        <span>The Two gave birth to the Three.</span><br/>
        <span>And the Three gave birth to the ten thousand things.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things carry Yin on their backs and wrap their arms around Yang.</span><br/>
        <span>Through the blending of the qi they arrive at a state of harmony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The things that are hated by the whole world</span><br/>
        <span>Are to be orphaned, widowed, and have no grain.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet kings and dukes take these as their names.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus with all things—some are increased by taking away;</span><br/>
        <span>While some are diminished by adding on.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, what other men teach,</span><br/>
        <span>[I] will also consider and then teach to others.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, “The strong and violent do not come to a natural end.”</span><br/>
        <span>I will take this as the father of my studies.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-43">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The softest, most pliable thing in the world runs roughshod over the firmest things in the world.</span><br/>
        <span>that which has no substance gets into that which has no spaces or cracks.</span><br/>
        <span>I therefore know that there is benefit in taking no action.</span><br/>
        <span>The wordless teaching, the benefit of taking no action—</span><br/>
        <span>Few in the world can realize these!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-44">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fame or your body—which is more dear?</span><br/>
        <span>Your body or possessions—which is worth more?</span><br/>
        <span>Gain or loss—in which is there harm?</span><br/>
        <span>If your desires are great, you’re bound to be extravagant;</span><br/>
        <span>If your store much away, you’re bound to lose a great deal.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, if you know contentment, you’ll not be disgraced.</span><br/>
        <span>If you know when to stop, you’ll suffer no harm.</span><br/>
        <span>And in this way you can last a very long time.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-45">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great completion seems incomplete;</span><br/>
        <span>Yet its usefulness is never exhausted.</span><br/>
        <span>Great fullness seems to be empty;</span><br/>
        <span>Yet its usefulness is never used up.</span><br/>
        <span>Great straightness seems to be bent.</span><br/>
        <span>Great skill seems to be clumsy.</span><br/>
        <span>Great surplus seems to stammer.</span><br/>
        <span>Activity overcomes cold;</span><br/>
        <span>Tranquility overcomes heat.</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re quiet and tranquil you can become the ruler of the world.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-46">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the world has the Way, ambling horses are retired to fertilize [fields].</span><br/>
        <span>When the world lacks the Way, war horses are reared in the suburbs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Of crimes—none is greater than having things that one desires;</span><br/>
        <span>Of disasters—none is greater than not knowing when one has enough.</span><br/>
        <span>Of defects—none brings more sorrow than one desire to attain.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the contentment one has when he knows that he has enough, is abiding contentment indeed.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-47">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>No need to leave your door to know the whole world;</span><br/>
        <span>No need to peer through your windows to know the Way of Heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>The farther you go, the less you know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the Sage knows without going,</span><br/>
        <span>Names without seeing,</span><br/>
        <span>And completes without doing a thing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-48">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who work at their studies increase day after day;</span><br/>
        <span>Those who have heard the Dao decrease day after day.</span><br/>
        <span>They decrease and decrease, till they get to the point where they do nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>They do nothing and yet there’s nothing left undone.</span><br/>
        <span>When someone wants to take control of the world, he must always be unconcerned with affairs.</span><br/>
        <span>For in a case where he’s concerned with affairs,</span><br/>
        <span>He’ll be unworthy, as well, of taking control of the world.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-49">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Sage constantly has no [set] mind;</span><br/>
        <span>He takes the mind of the common people as his mind.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who are good he regards as good;</span><br/>
        <span>Those who are not good he also regards as good.</span><br/>
        <span>[In this way] he attains goodness.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who are trustworthy he trusts;</span><br/>
        <span>And those who are not trustworthy he also trusts.</span><br/>
        <span>[In this way] he gets their trust.</span><br/>
        <span>As for the Sage’s presence in the world—he is one with it.</span><br/>
        <span>And with the world he merges his mind.</span><br/>
        <span>The common people all fix their eyes and ears on him.</span><br/>
        <span>And the Sage treats them all as his children.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-50">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>We come out into life and go back into death.</span><br/>
        <span>The companions of life are thirteen;</span><br/>
        <span>The companions of death are thirteen;</span><br/>
        <span>And yet people, because they regard life as LIFE, in all of their actions move towards the thirteen that belong to the realm of death.</span><br/>
        <span>Now, why is this so?</span><br/>
        <span>It’s because they regard life as LIFE.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>You’ve no doubt heard of those who are good at holding on to life:</span><br/>
        <span>When walking through hills, they don’t avoid rhinos and tigers;</span><br/>
        <span>When they go into battle, they don’t put on armor or shields;</span><br/>
        <span>The rhino has no place to probe with its horn;</span><br/>
        <span>The tiger finds no place to put its claws.</span><br/>
        <span>And weapons find no place to hold their blades.</span><br/>
        <span>Now, why is this so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because there is no place for death in them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-51">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way gives birth to them and Virtue nourishes them;</span><br/>
        <span>Substance gives them form and their unique capacities complete them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the ten thousand things venerate the Way and honor Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>As for their veneration of the Way and their honoring of Virtue—</span><br/>
        <span>No one rewards them for it; it’s constantly so on its own.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way gives birth to them, nourishes them, matures them, completes them, rests them, rears them, supports them, and protects them.</span><br/>
        <span>It gives birth to them but doesn’t try to own them;</span><br/>
        <span>It acts on their behalf but doesn’t make them dependent;</span><br/>
        <span>It matures them but doesn’t rule them.</span><br/>
        <span>This we call Profound Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-52">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The world had a beginning,</span><br/>
        <span>Which can be considered the mother of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Having attained the mother, in order to understand her children.</span><br/>
        <span>If you return and hold on to the mother, till the end of your life you’ll suffer no harm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Block up the holes;</span><br/>
        <span>Close the doors;</span><br/>
        <span>And till the end of your life you’ll not labor.</span><br/>
        <span>Open the holes;</span><br/>
        <span>Meddle in affairs;</span><br/>
        <span>And till the end of your life you’ll not be saved.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To receive the small is called “discernment.”</span><br/>
        <span>To hold on to the pliant is called “strength.”</span><br/>
        <span>If you use the rays to return to the bright light,</span><br/>
        <span>You’ll not abandon your life to peril.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called Following the Constant.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-53">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Were I to have the least bit of knowledge, in walking on a Great Rod, it’s only going astray that I would fear.</span><br/>
        <span>The Great Way is very level;</span><br/>
        <span>But people greatly delight in tortuous paths.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The courts are swept very clean;</span><br/>
        <span>While the fields are full of weeds;</span><br/>
        <span>And the granaries are all empty.</span><br/>
        <span>Their clothing—richly embroidered and colored;</span><br/>
        <span>While at their waists they carry sharp swords.</span><br/>
        <span>They gorge themselves on food, and of possessions and goods they have plenty.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called thievery!</span><br/>
        <span>And thievery certainly isn’t the Way!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-54">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is firmly set up can’t be pulled down;</span><br/>
        <span>What is firmly embraced cannot slip free.</span><br/>
        <span>And your sons and grandsons, as a result, will sacrifice without end.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you cultivate it in your person, your virtue will then be genuine;</span><br/>
        <span>When you cultivate it in your family, your virtue will then be overflow;</span><br/>
        <span>When you cultivate it in your village, your virtue will then be long lasting;</span><br/>
        <span>When you cultivate it in your state, your virtue will then be abundant;</span><br/>
        <span>And when you cultivate it throughout the world, your virtue will then be widespread.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Use the individual to examine the individual;</span><br/>
        <span>Use the family to examine the family;</span><br/>
        <span>Use the village to examine the village;</span><br/>
        <span>Use the state to examine the state;</span><br/>
        <span>And use the world to examine the world;</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know that the world is so?</span><br/>
        <span>By this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-55">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>One who embraces the fullness of Virtue,</span><br/>
        <span>Can be compared to a newborn babe.</span><br/>
        <span>Wasps and scorpions, snakes and vipers do not sting him;</span><br/>
        <span>Birds of prey and fierce beasts do not seize him;</span><br/>
        <span>His bones and muscles are weak and pliant, yet his grasp is firm;</span><br/>
        <span>He does not yet know the meeting of male and female, yet his organ is aroused—</span><br/>
        <span>This is because his essence is at its height.</span><br/>
        <span>He can scream all day, yet he won’t become hoarse—</span><br/>
        <span>This is because his harmony is at its height.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know harmony is called “the constant”;</span><br/>
        <span>To know the constant is called “being wise”;</span><br/>
        <span>To add on to life is called a “bad omen”;</span><br/>
        <span>For the mind to control the breath—that’s called “forcing things.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When things reach their prime they get old;</span><br/>
        <span>This is called “not the Way.”</span><br/>
        <span>What is not the Way will come to an early end.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-56">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who know don’t talk about it; those who talk don’t know it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He blocks up his holes,</span><br/>
        <span>Closes his doors,</span><br/>
        <span>Softens the glare,</span><br/>
        <span>Settles the dust,</span><br/>
        <span>Files down the sharp edges,</span><br/>
        <span>And unties the tangles.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called Profound Union.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, there is no way to get intimate with him,</span><br/>
        <span>But there is also no way to shun him.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no way to benefit him,</span><br/>
        <span>But there is also no way to harm him.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no way to ennoble him,</span><br/>
        <span>But there is also no way to debase him.</span><br/>
        <span>For this very reason he’s the noblest thing in the world.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-57">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Use the upright and correct to order the state;</span><br/>
        <span>Use surprise tactics when you use troops;</span><br/>
        <span>Use unconcern with affairs to take control of the world.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know that this is so?</span><br/>
        <span>Well, the more taboos and prohibitions there are in the world, the poorer the people will be;</span><br/>
        <span>The more sharp weapons the people possess, the more muddled the states will be;</span><br/>
        <span>The more knowledge and skill people have, the more novel things will appear;</span><br/>
        <span>The more legal matters are made prominent, the more robbers and thieves there will be.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the words of the Sage say:</span><br/>
        <span>I do nothing, and the people of themselves are transformed;</span><br/>
        <span>I love tranquility, and the people of themselves are upright;</span><br/>
        <span>I’m unconcerned with affairs, and the people of themselves become rich.</span><br/>
        <span>I desire not to desire, and the people of themselves are [genuine and simple, like] uncarved wood.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-58">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the government is muddled and confused,</span><br/>
        <span>The people are genuine and sincere.</span><br/>
        <span>When the government is discriminate and clear,</span><br/>
        <span>The state is crafy and cunning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Disaster is that on which good fortune depends.</span><br/>
        <span>Good fortune is that in which disaster’s concealed.</span><br/>
        <span>Who knows where it will end?</span><br/>
        <span>For there is no [fixed] “correct.”</span><br/>
        <span>The “correct” turns into the “deviant”;</span><br/>
        <span>And “good” turns into “evil.”</span><br/>
        <span>People’s state of confusion</span><br/>
        <span>Has certainly existed for a long time.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore be square but don’t cut;</span><br/>
        <span>Be sharp but don’t stab;</span><br/>
        <span>Be straightforward but not unrestrained;</span><br/>
        <span>Be bright but don’t dazzle.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-59">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For ordering humanity and serving Heaven, nothing’s so good as being sparing.</span><br/>
        <span>For only if you are sparing can you, therefore, early submit [to the Way].</span><br/>
        <span>Early submission—this is called to repeatedly accumulate Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>If you repeatedly accumulate Virtue, then there is nothing you can’t overcome.</span><br/>
        <span>When there is nothing you can’t overcome, no one knows where it will end.</span><br/>
        <span>When no one knows where it will end, you can possess the state.</span><br/>
        <span>And when you possess the mother of the state, you can last a very long time.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called [having] deep roots and a firm base,</span><br/>
        <span>It’s the Way of long life and long-lasting vision.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-60">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Ruling a large state is like cooking small fish.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you use the Way to govern the world, evil spirits won’t have godlike power.</span><br/>
        <span>Actually, it’s not that evil spirits won’t have godlike power,</span><br/>
        <span>It’s that their power will not harm men.</span><br/>
        <span>But it’s not [just] that their power won’t harm men,</span><br/>
        <span>The Sage, also, will not harm them.</span><br/>
        <span>Since these two do not harm others,</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore their Virtues intermingle and return to them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-61">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The large state is like the lower part of a river;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the female of the world;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the meeting point of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>The female constantly overcomes the male with tranquility.</span><br/>
        <span>Because she is tranquil, therefore she is fittingly underneath.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The large state—if it is below the small state, then it takes over the small state;</span><br/>
        <span>The small state—if it is below the large state, then it is taken over by the large state.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore some by being low take over,</span><br/>
        <span>And some by being low are taken over.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the large state merely desires to unite and rear others;</span><br/>
        <span>While the small state merely desires to enter and serve others.</span><br/>
        <span>If both get what they want,</span><br/>
        <span>Then the large state should fittingly be underneath.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-62">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way is that toward which all things flow.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the treasure of the good man,</span><br/>
        <span>And that which protects the bad.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Beautiful words can be bought and sold;</span><br/>
        <span>Honored deeds can be presented to others as gifts;</span><br/>
        <span>[Even with] things that people regard as no good—will they be rejected?</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, when the So of Heaven is being enthroned or the Three Ministers installed,</span><br/>
        <span>Though you might salture them which disks of jade preceded by teams of four horses,</span><br/>
        <span>That’s not so good as sitting still and offering this.</span><br/>
        <span>The reason why the ancients valued this—what was it?</span><br/>
        <span>Did they not say, “Those who seek, with this will attain, and those who commit offenses, with this will escape”?!</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, it’s the most valued thing in the world.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-63">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Act without acting;</span><br/>
        <span>Serve without concern for affairs;</span><br/>
        <span>Find flavor in what has no flavor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Regard the small as large and the few as many,</span><br/>
        <span>And repay resentment with kindness.</span><br/>
        <span>Plan for the difficult while it is easy;</span><br/>
        <span>Act on the large while it’s minute.</span><br/>
        <span>The most difficult things in the world begin as things that are easy;</span><br/>
        <span>The largest things in the world arise from the minute.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage, to the end does not strive to do the great,</span><br/>
        <span>And as a result, he is able to accomplish the great;</span><br/>
        <span>Those who too lightly agree will necessarily be trusted by few;</span><br/>
        <span>And those who regard many things as easy will necessarily [end up] with many difficulties.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, even the Sage regards things as difficult,</span><br/>
        <span>And as a result, in the end he has no difficulty.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-64">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is at rest is easy to hold;</span><br/>
        <span>What has not yet given a sign is easy to plan for;</span><br/>
        <span>The brittle is easily shattered;</span><br/>
        <span>The minute is easily scattered;</span><br/>
        <span>Act on it before it comes into being;</span><br/>
        <span>Order it before it turns into chaos.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A tree [so big] that it takes both arms to surround starts out as the tiniest shoot;</span><br/>
        <span>A nine-story terrace rises up from a basket of dirt.</span><br/>
        <span>A high place one hundred, one thousand feet high begins from under your feet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who act on it ruin it;</span><br/>
        <span>Those who hold on to it lose it.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage does not act,</span><br/>
        <span>And as a result, he doesn’t ruin [things];</span><br/>
        <span>He does not hold on to [things],</span><br/>
        <span>And as a result, he doesn’t lose [things];</span><br/>
        <span>In people’s handling of affairs, they always ruin things when they’re right at the point of completion.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore we say, “If you’re as careful at the end as you were at the beginning, you’ll have no failures.”</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage desires not to desire and doesn’t value goods that are hard to obtain;</span><br/>
        <span>He learns not to learn and returns to what the masses pass by;</span><br/>
        <span>He could help all things to be natural, yet he dare not do it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-65">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who practiced the Way in antiquity,</span><br/>
        <span>Did not use it to enlighten the people.</span><br/>
        <span>Rather, they used it to make them dumb.</span><br/>
        <span>Now the reason why people are difficult to rule is because of their knowledge;</span><br/>
        <span>As a result, to use knowledge to rule the state</span><br/>
        <span>Is thievery of the state;</span><br/>
        <span>To use ignorance to rule the state</span><br/>
        <span>Is kindness to the state.</span><br/>
        <span>One who constantly understands these two,</span><br/>
        <span>Also [understands] the principle.</span><br/>
        <span>To constantly understand the principle—</span><br/>
        <span>This is called Profound Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>Profound Virtue is deep, is far-reaching,</span><br/>
        <span>And together with things it returns.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus we arrive at the Great Accord.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-66">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The reason why rivers and oceans are able to be the kings of the one hundred valleys is that they are good at being below them.</span><br/>
        <span>for this reason they are able to be the kings of the one hundred valleys.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore in the Sage’s desire to be above the people,</span><br/>
        <span>He must in his speech be below them.</span><br/>
        <span>And in his desire to be at the front of the people,</span><br/>
        <span>He must in his person be behind them.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus he dwells above, yet the people do not regard him as heavey;</span><br/>
        <span>And he dwells in front, yet the people do not see him as posing a threat.</span><br/>
        <span>The whole world delights in his praise and never tires of him.</span><br/>
        <span>Is it not because he is not contentious,</span><br/>
        <span>That, as a result, no one in the world can contend with him?!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-67">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The whole world says, I’m Great;</span><br/>
        <span>Great, yet unlike [everyone else],</span><br/>
        <span>But it’s precisely because I’m unlike [everyone else], that I’m therefore able to be Great.</span><br/>
        <span>Were I like [everyone else], for a long time now I’d have seemed insignificant and small.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I constantly have three treasures;</span><br/>
        <span>Hold on to them and treasure them.</span><br/>
        <span>The first is compassion;</span><br/>
        <span>The second is frugality;</span><br/>
        <span>And the third is not presuming to be at the forefront in the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Now, it’s because I’m compassionate that I therefore can be courageous;</span><br/>
        <span>And it’s because I’m frugal that I therefore can be magnamimous;</span><br/>
        <span>And it’s because I don’t presume to be at the forefront in the world that I therefore can be the head of those with complete talent.</span><br/>
        <span>Now, if you abandon this compassion and yet try to be courageous,</span><br/>
        <span>And if you abandon this frugality and yet try to be magnanimous,</span><br/>
        <span>And if you abandon this staying behind and yet go to the fore,</span><br/>
        <span>Then you will die.</span><br/>
        <span>If with compassion you attack, then you’ll win;</span><br/>
        <span>If you defend, then you’ll stand firm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When Heaven’s about to establish him,</span><br/>
        <span>It’s as though he surrounds him with the protective wall of compassion.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-68">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, one who is good at being a warrior doesn’t make a show of his might;</span><br/>
        <span>One who is good in battle doesn’t get angry;</span><br/>
        <span>One who is good at defeating the enemy doesn’t engage him.</span><br/>
        <span>And one who is good at using men places himself below them.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the virtue of not competing;</span><br/>
        <span>This is called [correctly] using men;</span><br/>
        <span>This is called matching Heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>It’s the high point of the past.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-69">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who use weapons have a saying which goes:</span><br/>
        <span>“I don’t presume to act like the host, and instead play the part of the guest;</span><br/>
        <span>I don’t advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.”</span><br/>
        <span>This is called moving forward without moving forword—</span><br/>
        <span>Rolling up one’s sleeves without baring one’s arms—</span><br/>
        <span>Grasping firmly without holding a weapon—</span><br/>
        <span>And enticing to fight when there’s no opponent.</span><br/>
        <span>Of disasters, none is greater than [thinking] you have no rival.</span><br/>
        <span>To think you have no rival is to come close to losing my treasures.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, when weapons are raised and [the opponents] are farily well matched,</span><br/>
        <span>Then it’s the one who feels grief that will win.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-70">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words are easy to understand,</span><br/>
        <span>And easy to put into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one in the world can understand them,</span><br/>
        <span>And no one can put them into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>Now my words have an ancestor, and my deeds have a lord,</span><br/>
        <span>And it’s simply because [people] have no understanding [of them], that they therefore don’t understand me.</span><br/>
        <span>But when those who understand me are few, then I’m of great value.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage wears coarse woolen cloth, but inside it he holds on to jade.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-71">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know you don’t know is best.</span><br/>
        <span>Not to know you [don’t] know is a flaw.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the Sage’s not being flawed</span><br/>
        <span>Stems from his recognizing a flaw as a flaw.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, he is flawless.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-72">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the people don’t respect those in power, then what they greatly fear is about to arrive.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Don’t narrow the size of the places in which they live;</span><br/>
        <span>Don’t oppress them in their means of livelihood.</span><br/>
        <span>It’s simply because you do not oppress them, that they therefore will not be fed up.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage knows himself but doesn’t show himself;</span><br/>
        <span>he cherishes himself but doesn’t value himself.</span><br/>
        <span>For this reason, he rejects that and takes this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-73">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you’re brave in being daring, you’ll be killed;</span><br/>
        <span>If you’re brave in not being daring, you’ll live.</span><br/>
        <span>With these two things, in one case there’s profit, in the other there’s harm.</span><br/>
        <span>The things Heaven hates—who knows why?</span><br/>
        <span>The Way of Heaven is not to fight yet to be good at winning—</span><br/>
        <span>Not to speak yet skillfully respond—</span><br/>
        <span>No one summons it, yet it comes on its own—</span><br/>
        <span>To be at ease yet carefully plan.</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven’s net is large and vast;</span><br/>
        <span>Its mesh may be coarse yet nothing slips through.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-74">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If the people were constant [in their behavior] and yet did not fear death,</span><br/>
        <span>How could you use execution to intimidate them?</span><br/>
        <span>If you brought it about that the people were constant [in their behavior] and moreover feared, and [we] took those who behaved in abnormal ways and killed them—who would dare act in this way?!</span><br/>
        <span>If the people are constant and moreover necessarily fear death, then we constantly have the one in charge of executions.</span><br/>
        <span>Now killing people in place of the one in charge of executions, this [is like] cutting wood in place of the head carpenter.</span><br/>
        <span>And of those who cut wood in place of the head carpenter, very few do not hurt their hands!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-75">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The reason why people starve,</span><br/>
        <span>Is because they take so much in tax-grain.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they starve.</span><br/>
        <span>The reason why the common people cannot be ruled,</span><br/>
        <span>Is because their superiors have their reason for acting.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they cannot be ruled.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The reason why people take death lightly,</span><br/>
        <span>Is because they so avidly seek after life.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they take death lightly.</span><br/>
        <span>Only those who do not act for the purpose of living—</span><br/>
        <span>Only these are superior to those who value life.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-76">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When people are born, they’re supple and soft;</span><br/>
        <span>Whey they die, they end up stretched out firm and rigid;</span><br/>
        <span>When the ten thousand things and grasses and trees are alive, they’re supple and pliant;</span><br/>
        <span>When they’re dead, they’re withered and dried out.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore we say that the firm and rigid are compassions of death,</span><br/>
        <span>While the supple, the soft, the weak, and the delicate are compassions of life.</span><br/>
        <span>If a soldier is rigid, he won’t win;</span><br/>
        <span>If a tree is rigid, it will come to its end.</span><br/>
        <span>Rigidity and power occupy the inferior position;</span><br/>
        <span>Suppleness, softness, weakness, and delicateness occupy the superior position.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-77">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Way of Heaven is like the flexing of a bow.</span><br/>
        <span>The high it presses down; the low it raises up.</span><br/>
        <span>From those with a surplus it takes away; to those without enough it adds on.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the way of Heaven—</span><br/>
        <span>Is to reduce the excessive and increase the insufficient;</span><br/>
        <span>The Way of Man—</span><br/>
        <span>Is to reduce the insufficient and offer more to the excessive.</span><br/>
        <span>Now, who is able to have a surplus and use it to offer to Heaven?</span><br/>
        <span>Clearly, it’s only the one who possesses the Way.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage—</span><br/>
        <span>Take actions but does not possess them;</span><br/>
        <span>Accomplishes his tasks but does not dwell on them.</span><br/>
        <span>Like this, is his desire not to make a display of his worthiness.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-78">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the whole world, nothing is softer and weaker than water.</span><br/>
        <span>And yet for attacking the hard and strong, nothing can bear it,</span><br/>
        <span>Because there is nothing you can use to replace it.</span><br/>
        <span>That water can defeat the unyielding—</span><br/>
        <span>That the weak can defeat the strong—</span><br/>
        <span>There is no one in the whole world who doesn’t know it,</span><br/>
        <span>And yet there is no one who can put it into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>For this reason, the words of the Sage say:</span><br/>
        <span>To take on yourself the disgrace of the state—this is called being the lord of [the altars of] earth and grain;</span><br/>
        <span>To assume responsibility for all ill-omened events in the state—this is called being the king of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Correct words seem to say the reverse [of what you expect them to say].</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-79">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To make peace where there has been great resentment, there is bound to be resentment left over.</span><br/>
        <span>How could this be regarded as good?</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the Sage [holds] the right tally yet makes no demands of others.</span><br/>
        <span>For this reason, those who have virtue are in charge of the tally;</span><br/>
        <span>Those without virtue are in charge of the taxes.</span><br/>
        <span>The Way of Heaven has no favorites,</span><br/>
        <span>It’s always with the good man.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-80">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Let the country be small and people few—</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it about that there are weapons for “tens” and “hundreds,” yet let no one use them;</span><br/>
        <span>Have the people regard death gravely and put migrating far from their minds.</span><br/>
        <span>Though they might have boats and carriages, no one will ride them;</span><br/>
        <span>Though they might have armor and spears, no one will display them.</span><br/>
        <span>Have the people return to knotting cords and using them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>They will relish their food,</span><br/>
        <span>Regard their clothing as beautiful,</span><br/>
        <span>Delight in their customs,</span><br/>
        <span>And feel safe and secure in their homes.</span><br/>
        <span>Neighboring states might overlook one another,</span><br/>
        <span>And the sounds of chickens and dogs might be overheard,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet the people will arrive at old age and death with no comings and goings between them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-81">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Sincere words are not showy;</span><br/>
        <span>Showy words are not sincere.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who know are not “widely learned”;</span><br/>
        <span>Those “widely learned” do not know.</span><br/>
        <span>The good do not have a lot;</span><br/>
        <span>Those with a lot are not good.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Sage accumulates nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>Having used what he had for others,</span><br/>
        <span>He has even more.</span><br/>
        <span>Having given what he had to others,</span><br/>
        <span>What he has is even greater.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the Way of Heaven is to benefit and not cause any harm;</span><br/>
        <span>The Way of Man is to act on behalf of others and not to compete with them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
