<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>Tao Te Ching</title>
    <meta name="author" content="Lao Tzu"/>
    <meta name="translator" content="Gia Fu Feng &amp; Jane English"/>
    <meta name="year" content="1989"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <link href="../local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-01">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>The name that can be named is not the eternal name.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The nameless is the beginning of heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Ever desireless, one can see the mystery.</span><br/>
        <span>Ever desiring, one sees the manifestations.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These two spring from the same source but differ in name; this appears as darkness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Darkness within darkness.</span><br/>
        <span>The gate to all mystery.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-02">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Under heaven all can see beauty as beauty only because there is ugliness.</span><br/>
        <span>All can know good as good only because there is evil.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore having and not having arise together.</span><br/>
        <span>Difficult and easy complement each other.</span><br/>
        <span>Long and short contrast each other:</span><br/>
        <span>High and low rest upon each other;</span><br/>
        <span>Voice and sound harmonize each other;</span><br/>
        <span>Front and back follow one another.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage goes about doing nothing, teaching no-talking.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things rise and fall without cease,</span><br/>
        <span>Creating, yet not.</span><br/>
        <span>Working, yet not taking credit.</span><br/>
        <span>Work is done, then forgotten.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore it lasts forever.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-03">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not exalting the gifted prevents quarreling.</span><br/>
        <span>Not collecting treasures prevents stealing.</span><br/>
        <span>Not seeing desirable things prevents confusion of the heart.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wise therefore rule by emptying hearts and stuffing bellies, by weakening ambitions and strengthening bones.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If men lack knowledge and desire, then clever people will not try to interfere.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If nothing is done, then all will be well.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-04">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is an empty vessel; it is used, but never filled.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, unfathomable source of ten thousand things!</span><br/>
        <span>Blunt the sharpness,</span><br/>
        <span>Untangle the knot,</span><br/>
        <span>Soften the glare,</span><br/>
        <span>Merge with dust.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, hidden deep but ever present!</span><br/>
        <span>I do not know from whence it comes.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the forefather of the gods.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-05">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and Earth are impartial;</span><br/>
        <span>They see the ten thousand things as straw dogs.</span><br/>
        <span>The wise are impartial;</span><br/>
        <span>They see the people as straw dogs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The space between heaven and Earth is like a bellows.</span><br/>
        <span>The shape changes but not the form;</span><br/>
        <span>The more it moves, the more it yields.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>More words count less.</span><br/>
        <span>Hold fast to the center.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-06">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The valley spirit never dies;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the woman, primal mother.</span><br/>
        <span>Her gateway is the root of heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>It is like a veil barely seen.</span><br/>
        <span>Use it; it will never fail.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-07">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and Earth last forever.</span><br/>
        <span>Why do heaven and Earth last forever?</span><br/>
        <span>They are unborn,</span><br/>
        <span>So ever living.</span><br/>
        <span>The sage stays behind, thus he is ahead.</span><br/>
        <span>He is detached, thus at one with all.</span><br/>
        <span>Through selfless action, he attains fulfillment.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-08">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The highest good is like water.</span><br/>
        <span>Water give life to the ten thousand things and does not strive.</span><br/>
        <span>It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In dwelling, be close to the land.</span><br/>
        <span>In meditation, go deep in the heart.</span><br/>
        <span>In dealing with others, be gentle and kind.</span><br/>
        <span>In speech, be true.</span><br/>
        <span>In ruling, be just.</span><br/>
        <span>In daily life, be competent.</span><br/>
        <span>In action, be aware of the time and the season.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>No fight: No blame.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-09">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Better to stop short than fill to the brim.</span><br/>
        <span>Oversharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt.</span><br/>
        <span>Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it.</span><br/>
        <span>Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will follow.</span><br/>
        <span>Retire when the work is done.</span><br/>
        <span>This is the way of heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-10">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Carrying body and soul and embracing the one,</span><br/>
        <span>Can you avoid separation?</span><br/>
        <span>Attending fully and becoming supple,</span><br/>
        <span>Can you be as a newborn babe?</span><br/>
        <span>Washing and cleansing the primal vision,</span><br/>
        <span>Can you be without stain?</span><br/>
        <span>Loving all men and ruling the country,</span><br/>
        <span>Can you be without cleverness?</span><br/>
        <span>Opening and closing the gates of heaven,</span><br/>
        <span>Can you play the role of woman?</span><br/>
        <span>Understanding and being open to all things,</span><br/>
        <span>Are you able to do nothing?</span><br/>
        <span>Giving birth and nourishing,</span><br/>
        <span>Bearing yet not possessing,</span><br/>
        <span>Working yet not taking credit,</span><br/>
        <span>Leading yet not dominating,</span><br/>
        <span>This is the Primal Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-11">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thirty spokes share the wheel’s hub;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the center hole that makes it useful.</span><br/>
        <span>Shape clay into a vessel;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the space within that makes it useful.</span><br/>
        <span>Cut doors and windows for a room;</span><br/>
        <span>It is the holes which make it useful.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore benefit comes from what is there;</span><br/>
        <span>Usefulness from what is not there.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-12">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The five colors blind the eye.</span><br/>
        <span>The five tones deafen the ear.</span><br/>
        <span>The five flavors dull the taste.</span><br/>
        <span>Racing and hunting madden the mind.</span><br/>
        <span>Precious things lead one astray.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage is guided by what he feels and not by what he sees.</span><br/>
        <span>He lets go of that and chooses this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-13">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Accept disgrace willingly.</span><br/>
        <span>Accept misfortune as the human condition.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What do you mean by “Accept disgrace willingly”?</span><br/>
        <span>Accept being unimportant.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not be concerned with loss or gain.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called “accepting disgrace willingly.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What do you mean by “Accept misfortune as the human condition”?</span><br/>
        <span>Misfortune comes from having a body.</span><br/>
        <span>Without a body, how could there be misfortune?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Surrender yourself humbly; then you can be trusted to care for all things.</span><br/>
        <span>Love the world as your own self; then you can truly care for all things.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-14">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Look, it cannot be seen – it is beyond form.</span><br/>
        <span>Listen, it cannot be heard – it is beyond sound.</span><br/>
        <span>Grasp, it cannot be held – it is intangible.</span><br/>
        <span>These three are indefinable;</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they are joined in one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>From above it is not bright;</span><br/>
        <span>From below it is not dark:</span><br/>
        <span>An unbroken thread beyond description.</span><br/>
        <span>It returns to nothingness.</span><br/>
        <span>The form of the formless,</span><br/>
        <span>The image of the imageless,</span><br/>
        <span>It is called indefinable and beyond imagination.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Stand before it and there is no beginning.</span><br/>
        <span>Follow it and there is no end.</span><br/>
        <span>Stay with the ancient Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>Move with the present.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing the ancient beginning is the essence of Tao.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-15">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ancient masters were subtle, mysterious, profound, responsive.</span><br/>
        <span>The depth of their knowledge is unfathomable.</span><br/>
        <span>Because it is unfathomable,</span><br/>
        <span>All we can do is describe their appearance.</span><br/>
        <span>Watchful, like men crossing a winter stream.</span><br/>
        <span>Alert, like men aware of danger.</span><br/>
        <span>Courteous, like visiting guests.</span><br/>
        <span>Yielding like ice about to melt.</span><br/>
        <span>Simple, like uncarved blocks of wood.</span><br/>
        <span>Hollow, like caves.</span><br/>
        <span>Opaque, like muddy pools.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who can wait quietly while the mud settles?</span><br/>
        <span>Who can remain still until the moment of action?</span><br/>
        <span>Observers of the Tao do not seek fulfillment.</span><br/>
        <span>Not seeking fulfillment, they are not swayed by desire for change.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-16">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Empty yourself of everything.</span><br/>
        <span>Let the mind become still.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things rise and fall while the Self watches their return.</span><br/>
        <span>They grow and flourish and then return to the source.</span><br/>
        <span>Returning to the source is stillness, which is the way of nature.</span><br/>
        <span>The way of nature is unchanging.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing constancy is insight.</span><br/>
        <span>Not knowing constancy leads to disaster.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing constancy, the mind is open.</span><br/>
        <span>With an open mind, you will be openhearted.</span><br/>
        <span>Being openhearted, you will act royally.</span><br/>
        <span>Being royal, you will attain the divine.</span><br/>
        <span>Being divine, you will be at one with the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Being at one with the Tao is eternal.</span><br/>
        <span>And though the body dies, the Tao will never pass away.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-17">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The very highest if barely known.</span><br/>
        <span>Then comes that which people know and love.</span><br/>
        <span>Then that which is feared,</span><br/>
        <span>Then that which is despised.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who does not trust enough will not be trusted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When actions are performed</span><br/>
        <span>Without unnecessary speech,</span><br/>
        <span>People say, “We did it!”</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-18">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the great Tao is forgotten,</span><br/>
        <span>Kindness and morality arise.</span><br/>
        <span>When wisdom and intelligence are born,</span><br/>
        <span>The great pretense begins.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When there is no peace within the family,</span><br/>
        <span>Filial piety and devotion arise.</span><br/>
        <span>When the country is confused and in chaos,</span><br/>
        <span>Loyal ministers appear.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-19">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up sainthood, renounce wisdom,</span><br/>
        <span>And it will be a hundred times better for everyone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up kindness, renounce morality,</span><br/>
        <span>And men will rediscover filial piety and love.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up ingenuity, renounce profit,</span><br/>
        <span>And bandits and thieves will disappear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These three are outward forms alone; they are not sufficient in themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>It is more important</span><br/>
        <span>To see the simplicity,</span><br/>
        <span>To realize one’s true nature,</span><br/>
        <span>To cast off selfishness</span><br/>
        <span>And temper desire.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-20">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up learning, and put an end to your troubles.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Is there a difference between yes and no?</span><br/>
        <span>Is there a difference between good and evil?</span><br/>
        <span>Must I fear what others fear? What nonsense!</span><br/>
        <span>Other people are contented, enjoying the sacrificial feast of the ox.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In spring some go to the park, and climb the terrace,</span><br/>
        <span>But I alone am drifting, not knowing where I am.</span><br/>
        <span>Like a newborn babe before it learns to smile,</span><br/>
        <span>I am alone, without a place to go.</span><br/>
        <span>Others have more than they need, but</span><br/>
        <span>I alone have nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>I am a fool. Oh, yes! I am confused.</span><br/>
        <span>Others are clear and bright,</span><br/>
        <span>But I alone am dim and weak.</span><br/>
        <span>Others are sharp and clever,</span><br/>
        <span>But I alone am dull and stupid.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, I drift like the waves of the sea,</span><br/>
        <span>Without direction, like the restless wind.</span><br/>
        <span>Everyone else is busy,</span><br/>
        <span>But I alone am aimless and depressed.</span><br/>
        <span>I am different.</span><br/>
        <span>I am nourished by the great mother.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-21">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The greatest Virtue is to follow Tao and Tao alone.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao is elusive and intangible.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, it is intangible and elusive, and yet within is image.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, it is elusive and intangible, and yet within is form.</span><br/>
        <span>Oh, it is dim and dark, and yet within is essence.</span><br/>
        <span>This essence is very real, and therein lies faith.</span><br/>
        <span>From the very beginning until now its name has never been forgotten.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus I perceive the creation.</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know the ways of creation?</span><br/>
        <span>Because of this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-22">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Yield and overcome;</span><br/>
        <span>Bend and be straight;</span><br/>
        <span>Empty and be full;</span><br/>
        <span>Wear out and be new;</span><br/>
        <span>Have little and gain;</span><br/>
        <span>Have much and be confused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the wise embrace the one</span><br/>
        <span>And set an example to all.</span><br/>
        <span>Not putting on a display,</span><br/>
        <span>They shine forth.</span><br/>
        <span>Not justifying themselves,</span><br/>
        <span>They are distinguished.</span><br/>
        <span>Not boasting,</span><br/>
        <span>They receive recognition.</span><br/>
        <span>Not bragging,</span><br/>
        <span>They never falter.</span><br/>
        <span>They do not quarrel,</span><br/>
        <span>So no one quarrels with them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the ancients say, “Yield and overcome.”</span><br/>
        <span>Is that an empty saying?</span><br/>
        <span>Be really whole,</span><br/>
        <span>And all things will come to you.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-23">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To talk little is natural.</span><br/>
        <span>High winds do not last all morning.</span><br/>
        <span>Heavy rain does not last all day.</span><br/>
        <span>Why is this? Heaven and Earth!</span><br/>
        <span>If heaven and Earth cannot make things eternal,</span><br/>
        <span>How is it possible for man?</span><br/>
        <span>He who follows the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>Is at one with the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>He who is virtuous</span><br/>
        <span>Experiences Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>He who loses the way</span><br/>
        <span>Is lost.</span><br/>
        <span>When you are at one with the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao welcomes you.</span><br/>
        <span>When you are at one with Virtue,</span><br/>
        <span>The Virtue is always there.</span><br/>
        <span>When you are at one with loss,</span><br/>
        <span>The loss is experienced willingly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who does not trust enough</span><br/>
        <span>Will not be trusted.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-24">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who stands on tiptoe is not steady.</span><br/>
        <span>He who strides cannot maintain the pace.</span><br/>
        <span>He who makes a show is not enlightened.</span><br/>
        <span>He who is self-righteous is not respected.</span><br/>
        <span>He who boasts achieves nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>He who brags will not endure.</span><br/>
        <span>According to followers of the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>“These are extra food and unnecessary luggage.”</span><br/>
        <span>They do not bring happiness.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore followers of the Tao avoid them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-25">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Something mysteriously formed,</span><br/>
        <span>Born before heaven and Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>In the silence and the void,</span><br/>
        <span>Standing alone and unchanging,</span><br/>
        <span>Ever present and in motion.</span><br/>
        <span>Perhaps it is the mother of ten thousand things.</span><br/>
        <span>I do not know its name</span><br/>
        <span>Call it Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>For lack of a better word, I call it great.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Being great, it flows</span><br/>
        <span>It flows far away.</span><br/>
        <span>Having gone far, it returns.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, “Tao is great;</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven is great;</span><br/>
        <span>Earth is great;</span><br/>
        <span>The king is also great.”</span><br/>
        <span>These are the four great powers of the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>And the king is one of them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Man follows Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>Earth follows heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven follows the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Tao follows what is natural.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-26">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The heavy is the root of the light.</span><br/>
        <span>The still is the master of unrest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage, traveling all day,</span><br/>
        <span>Does not lose sight of his baggage.</span><br/>
        <span>Though there are beautiful things to be seen,</span><br/>
        <span>He remains unattached and calm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly in public?</span><br/>
        <span>To be light is to lose one’s root.</span><br/>
        <span>To be restless is to lose one’s control.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-27">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A good walker leaves no tracks;</span><br/>
        <span>A good speaker makes no slips;</span><br/>
        <span>A good reckoner needs no tally.</span><br/>
        <span>A good door needs no lock,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one can open it.</span><br/>
        <span>Good binding requires no knots,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one can loosen it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage takes care of all men</span><br/>
        <span>And abandons no one.</span><br/>
        <span>He takes care of all things</span><br/>
        <span>And abandons nothing.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called “following the light.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is a good man?</span><br/>
        <span>A teacher of a bad man.</span><br/>
        <span>What is a bad man?</span><br/>
        <span>A good man’s charge.</span><br/>
        <span>If the teacher is not respected,</span><br/>
        <span>And the student not cared for,</span><br/>
        <span>Confusion will arise, however clever one is.</span><br/>
        <span>This is the crux of mystery.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-28">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Know the strength of man,</span><br/>
        <span>But keep a woman’s care!</span><br/>
        <span>Be the stream of the universe!</span><br/>
        <span>Being the stream of the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>Ever true and unswerving,</span><br/>
        <span>Become as a little child once more.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Know the white,</span><br/>
        <span>But keep the black!</span><br/>
        <span>Be an example to the world!</span><br/>
        <span>Being an example to the world,</span><br/>
        <span>Ever true and unwavering,</span><br/>
        <span>Return to the infinite.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Know honor,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet keep humility.</span><br/>
        <span>Be the valley of the universe!</span><br/>
        <span>Being the valley of the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>Ever true and resourceful,</span><br/>
        <span>Return to the state of the uncarved block.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the block is carved, it becomes useful.</span><br/>
        <span>When the sage uses it, he becomes the ruler.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, “A great tailor cuts little.”</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-29">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do you think you can take over the universe and improve it?</span><br/>
        <span>I do not believe it can be done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The universe is sacred.</span><br/>
        <span>You cannot improve it.</span><br/>
        <span>If you try to change it, you will ruin it.</span><br/>
        <span>If you try to hold it, you will lose it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So sometimes things are ahead and sometimes they are behind;</span><br/>
        <span>Sometimes breathing is hard, sometimes it comes easily;</span><br/>
        <span>Sometimes there is strength and sometimes weakness;</span><br/>
        <span>Sometimes one is up and sometimes down.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage avoids extremes, excesses, and complacency.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-30">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Whenever you advise a ruler in the way of Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>Counsel him not to use force to conquer the universe.</span><br/>
        <span>For this would only cause resistance.</span><br/>
        <span>Thorn bushes spring up wherever the army has passed.</span><br/>
        <span>Lean years follow in the wake of a great war.</span><br/>
        <span>Just do what needs to be done.</span><br/>
        <span>Never take advantage of power.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Achieve results,</span><br/>
        <span>But never glory in them.</span><br/>
        <span>Achieve results,</span><br/>
        <span>But never boast.</span><br/>
        <span>Achieve results,</span><br/>
        <span>But never be proud.</span><br/>
        <span>Achieve results,</span><br/>
        <span>Because this is the natural way.</span><br/>
        <span>Achieve results,</span><br/>
        <span>But not through violence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Force is followed by loss of strength.</span><br/>
        <span>This is not the way of Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>That which goes against the Tao comes to an early end.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-31">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Good weapons are instruments of fear; all creatures hate them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore followers of Tao never use them.</span><br/>
        <span>The wise man prefers the left.</span><br/>
        <span>The man of war prefers the right.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Weapons are instruments of fear; they are not a wise man’s tools.</span><br/>
        <span>He uses them only when he has no choice.</span><br/>
        <span>Peace and quiet are dear to his heart,</span><br/>
        <span>And victory no cause for rejoicing.</span><br/>
        <span>If you rejoice in victory, then you delight in killing;</span><br/>
        <span>If you delight in killing, you cannot fulfill yourself.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>On happy occasions precedence is given to the left,</span><br/>
        <span>On sad occasions to the right.</span><br/>
        <span>In the army the general stands on the left,</span><br/>
        <span>The commander-in-chief on the right.</span><br/>
        <span>This means that war is conducted like a funeral.</span><br/>
        <span>When many people are being killed,</span><br/>
        <span>They should be mourned in heartfelt sorrow.</span><br/>
        <span>That is why a victory must be observed like a funeral.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-32">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is forever undefined.</span><br/>
        <span>Small though it is in the unformed state, it cannot be grasped.</span><br/>
        <span>If kings and lords could harness it,</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things would come together</span><br/>
        <span>And gentle rain fall.</span><br/>
        <span>Men would need no more instruction and all things would take their course.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Once the whole is divided, the parts need names.</span><br/>
        <span>There are already enough names.</span><br/>
        <span>One must know when to stop.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing when to stop averts trouble.</span><br/>
        <span>Tao in the world is like a river flowing home to the sea.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-33">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing others is wisdom;</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing the self is enlightenment.</span><br/>
        <span>Mastering others requires force;</span><br/>
        <span>Mastering the self needs strength.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who knows he has enough is rich.</span><br/>
        <span>Perseverance is a sign of willpower.</span><br/>
        <span>He who stays where he is endures.</span><br/>
        <span>To die but not to perish is to be eternally present.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-34">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left and to the right.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things depend upon it; it holds nothing back.</span><br/>
        <span>It fulfills its purpose silently and makes no claim.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It nourishes the ten thousand things,</span><br/>
        <span>And yet is not their lord.</span><br/>
        <span>It has no aim; it is very small.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things return to it,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet it is not their lord.</span><br/>
        <span>It is very great.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It does not show greatness,</span><br/>
        <span>And is therefore truly great.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-35">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All men will come to him who keeps to the one,</span><br/>
        <span>For there lie rest and happiness and peace.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Passersby may stop for music and good food,</span><br/>
        <span>But a description of the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>Seems without substance or flavor.</span><br/>
        <span>It cannot be seen, it cannot be heard,</span><br/>
        <span>And yet it cannot be exhausted.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-36">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>That which shrinks</span><br/>
        <span>Must first expand.</span><br/>
        <span>That which fails</span><br/>
        <span>Must first be strong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>That which is cast down</span><br/>
        <span>Must first be raised.</span><br/>
        <span>Before receiving</span><br/>
        <span>There must be giving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called perception of the nature of things.</span><br/>
        <span>Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fish cannot leave deep waters,</span><br/>
        <span>And a country’s weapons should not be displayed.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-37">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Tao abides in non-action,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet nothing is left undone.</span><br/>
        <span>If kings and lords observed this,</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things would develop naturally.</span><br/>
        <span>If they still desired to act,</span><br/>
        <span>They would return to the simplicity of formless substance.</span><br/>
        <span>Without for there is no desire.</span><br/>
        <span>Without desire there is.</span><br/>
        <span>And in this way all things would be at peace.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-38">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A truly good man is not aware of his goodness,</span><br/>
        <span>And is therefore good.</span><br/>
        <span>A foolish man tries to be good,</span><br/>
        <span>And is therefore not good.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A truly good man does nothing,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet leaves nothing undone.</span><br/>
        <span>A foolish man is always doing,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet much remains to be done.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When a truly kind man does something, he leaves nothing undone.</span><br/>
        <span>When a just man does something, he leaves a great deal to be done.</span><br/>
        <span>When a disciplinarian does something and no one responds,</span><br/>
        <span>He rolls up his sleeves in an attempt to enforce order.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore when Tao is lost, there is goodness.</span><br/>
        <span>When goodness is lost, there is kindness.</span><br/>
        <span>When kindness is lost, there is justice.</span><br/>
        <span>When justice is lost, there ritual.</span><br/>
        <span>Now ritual is the husk of faith and loyalty, the beginning of confusion.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowledge of the future is only a flowery trapping of Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the beginning of folly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the truly great man dwells on what is real and not what is on the surface,</span><br/>
        <span>On the fruit and not the flower.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore accept the one and reject the other.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-39">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These things from ancient times arise from one:</span><br/>
        <span>The sky is whole and clear.</span><br/>
        <span>The earth is whole and firm.</span><br/>
        <span>The spirit is whole and strong.</span><br/>
        <span>The valley is whole and full.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things are whole and alive.</span><br/>
        <span>Kings and lords are whole, and the country is upright.</span><br/>
        <span>All these are in virtue of wholeness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The clarity of the sky prevents its falling.</span><br/>
        <span>The firmness of the earth prevents its splitting.</span><br/>
        <span>The strength of the spirit prevents its being used up.</span><br/>
        <span>The fullness of the valley prevents its running dry.</span><br/>
        <span>The growth of the ten thousand things prevents their drying out.</span><br/>
        <span>The leadership of kings and lords prevents the downfall of the country.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the humble is the root of the noble.</span><br/>
        <span>The low is the foundation of the high.</span><br/>
        <span>Princes and lords consider themselves “orphaned”, “widowed” and “worthless”.</span><br/>
        <span>Do they not depend on being humble?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Too much success is not an advantage.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not tinkle like jade</span><br/>
        <span>Or clatter like stone chimes.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-40">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Returning is the motion of the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Yielding is the way of the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things are born of being.</span><br/>
        <span>Being is born of not being.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-41">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wise student hears of the Tao and practices it diligently.</span><br/>
        <span>The average student hears of the Tao and gives it thought now and again.</span><br/>
        <span>The foolish student hears of the Tao and laughs aloud.</span><br/>
        <span>If there were no laughter, the Tao would not be what it is.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence it is said:</span><br/>
        <span>The bright path seems dim;</span><br/>
        <span>Going forward seems like retreat;</span><br/>
        <span>The easy way seems hard;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest Virtue seems empty;</span><br/>
        <span>Great purity seems sullied;</span><br/>
        <span>A wealth of Virtue seems inadequate;</span><br/>
        <span>The strength of Virtue seems frail;</span><br/>
        <span>Real Virtue seems unreal;</span><br/>
        <span>The perfect square has no corners;</span><br/>
        <span>Great talents ripen late;</span><br/>
        <span>The highest notes are hard to hear;</span><br/>
        <span>The greatest form has no shape;</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao is hidden and without name.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao alone nourishes and brings everything to fulfillment.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-42">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao begot one.</span><br/>
        <span>One begot two.</span><br/>
        <span>Two begot three.</span><br/>
        <span>And three begot the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things carry yin and embrace yang.</span><br/>
        <span>They achieve harmony by combining these forces.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Men hate to be “orphaned,” “widowed,” or “worthless,”</span><br/>
        <span>But this is how kings and lords describe themselves.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For one gains by losing</span><br/>
        <span>And loses by gaining.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What others teach, I also teach; that is:</span><br/>
        <span>“A violent man will die a violent death!”</span><br/>
        <span>This will be the essence of my teaching.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-43">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The softest thing in the universe</span><br/>
        <span>Overcomes the hardest thing in the universe.</span><br/>
        <span>That without substance can enter where there is no room.</span><br/>
        <span>Hence I know the value of non-action.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Teaching without words and work without doing</span><br/>
        <span>Are understood by very few.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-44">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fame or self: Which matters more?</span><br/>
        <span>Self or wealth: Which is more precious?</span><br/>
        <span>Gain or loss: Which is more painful?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who is attached to things will suffer much.</span><br/>
        <span>He who saves will suffer heavy loss.</span><br/>
        <span>A contented man is never disappointed.</span><br/>
        <span>He who knows when to stop does not find himself in trouble.</span><br/>
        <span>He will stay forever safe.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-45">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great accomplishment seems imperfect,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet it does not outlive its usefulness.</span><br/>
        <span>Great fullness seems empty,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet cannot be exhausted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great straightness seems twisted.</span><br/>
        <span>Great intelligence seems stupid.</span><br/>
        <span>Great eloquence seems awkward.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Movement overcomes cold.</span><br/>
        <span>Stillness overcomes heat.</span><br/>
        <span>Stillness and tranquility set things in order in the universe.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-46">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the Tao is present in the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>The horses haul manure.</span><br/>
        <span>When the Tao is absent from the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>War horses are bred outside the city.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is no greater sin than desire,</span><br/>
        <span>No greater curse than discontent,</span><br/>
        <span>No greater misfortune than wanting something for oneself.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore he who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-47">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Without going outside, you may know the whole world.</span><br/>
        <span>Without looking through the window, you may see the ways of heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>The farther you go, the less you know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus the sage knows without traveling;</span><br/>
        <span>He sees without looking;</span><br/>
        <span>He works without doing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-48">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the pursuit of learning, every day something is acquired.</span><br/>
        <span>In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Less and less is done</span><br/>
        <span>Until non-action is achieved.</span><br/>
        <span>When nothing is done, nothing is left undone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The world is ruled by letting things take their course.</span><br/>
        <span>It cannot be ruled by interfering.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-49">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The sage has no mind of his own.</span><br/>
        <span>He is aware of the needs of others.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I am good to people who are good.</span><br/>
        <span>I am also good to people who are not good.</span><br/>
        <span>Because Virtue is goodness.</span><br/>
        <span>I have faith in people who are faithful.</span><br/>
        <span>I also have faith in people who are not faithful.</span><br/>
        <span>Because Virtue is faithfulness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The sage is shy and humble – to the world he seems confusing.</span><br/>
        <span>Others look to him and listen.</span><br/>
        <span>He behaves like a little child.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-50">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Between birth and death,</span><br/>
        <span>Three in ten are followers of life,</span><br/>
        <span>Three in ten are followers of death,</span><br/>
        <span>And men just passing from birth to death also number three in ten.</span><br/>
        <span>Why is this so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because they live their lives on the gross level.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who knows how to live can walk abroad</span><br/>
        <span>Without fear of rhinoceros or tiger.</span><br/>
        <span>He will not be wounded in battle.</span><br/>
        <span>For in him rhinoceroses can find no place to thrust their horn,</span><br/>
        <span>Tigers no place to use their claws,</span><br/>
        <span>And weapons no place to pierce.</span><br/>
        <span>Why is this so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because he has no place for death to enter.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-51">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All things arise from Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>They are nourished by Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>They are formed from matter.</span><br/>
        <span>They are shaped by environment.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus the ten thousand things all respect Tao and honor Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>Respect of Tao and honor of Virtue are not demanded,</span><br/>
        <span>But they are in the nature of things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore all things arise from Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>By Virtue they are nourished,</span><br/>
        <span>Developed, cared for,</span><br/>
        <span>Sheltered, comforted,</span><br/>
        <span>Grown, and protected.</span><br/>
        <span>Creating without claiming,</span><br/>
        <span>Doing without taking credit,</span><br/>
        <span>Guiding without interfering,</span><br/>
        <span>This is Primal Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-52">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The beginning of the universe</span><br/>
        <span>Is the mother of all things.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing the mother, on also knows the sons.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing the sons, yet remaining in touch with the mother,</span><br/>
        <span>Brings freedom from the fear of death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Keep your mouth shut,</span><br/>
        <span>Guard the senses,</span><br/>
        <span>And life is ever full.</span><br/>
        <span>Open your mouth,</span><br/>
        <span>Always be busy,</span><br/>
        <span>And life is beyond hope.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Seeing the small is insight;</span><br/>
        <span>Yielding to force is strength.</span><br/>
        <span>Using the outer light, return to insight,</span><br/>
        <span>And in this way be saved from harm.</span><br/>
        <span>This is learning constancy.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-53">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If I have even just a little sense,</span><br/>
        <span>I will walk on the main road and my only fear will be of straying from it.</span><br/>
        <span>Keeping to the main road is easy,</span><br/>
        <span>But people love to be sidetracked.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the court is arrayed in splendor,</span><br/>
        <span>The fields are full of weeds,</span><br/>
        <span>And the granaries are bare.</span><br/>
        <span>Some wear gorgeous clothes,</span><br/>
        <span>Carry sharp swords,</span><br/>
        <span>And indulge themselves with food and drink;</span><br/>
        <span>They have more possessions than they can use.</span><br/>
        <span>They are robber barons.</span><br/>
        <span>This is certainly not the way of Tao.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-54">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is firmly established cannot be uprooted.</span><br/>
        <span>What is firmly grasped cannot slip away.</span><br/>
        <span>It will be honored from generation to generation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Cultivate Virtue in your self,</span><br/>
        <span>And Virtue will be real.</span><br/>
        <span>Cultivate it in the family,</span><br/>
        <span>And Virtue will abound.</span><br/>
        <span>Cultivate it in the village,</span><br/>
        <span>And Virtue will grow.</span><br/>
        <span>Cultivate it in the nation,</span><br/>
        <span>And Virtue will be abundant.</span><br/>
        <span>Cultivate it in the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>And Virtue will be everywhere.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore look at the body as body;</span><br/>
        <span>Look at the family as family;</span><br/>
        <span>Look at the village as village;</span><br/>
        <span>Look at the nation as nation;</span><br/>
        <span>Look at the universe as universe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know the universe is like this?</span><br/>
        <span>By looking!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-55">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who is filled with Virtue is like a newborn child.</span><br/>
        <span>Wasps and serpents will not sting him;</span><br/>
        <span>Wild beasts will not pounce upon him;</span><br/>
        <span>He will not be attacked by birds of prey.</span><br/>
        <span>His bones are soft, his muscles weak,</span><br/>
        <span>But his grip is firm.</span><br/>
        <span>He has not experienced the union of man and woman, but is whole.</span><br/>
        <span>His manhood is strong.</span><br/>
        <span>He screams all day without becoming hoarse.</span><br/>
        <span>This is perfect harmony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing harmony is constancy.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing constancy is enlightenment.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is not wise to rush about.</span><br/>
        <span>Controlling the breath causes strain.</span><br/>
        <span>If too much energy is used, exhaustion follows.</span><br/>
        <span>This is not the way of Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Whatever is contrary to Tao will not last long.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-56">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who know do not talk.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who talk do not know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Keep your mouth closed.</span><br/>
        <span>Guard your senses.</span><br/>
        <span>Temper your sharpness.</span><br/>
        <span>Simplify your problems.</span><br/>
        <span>Mask your brightness.</span><br/>
        <span>Be at one with the dust of the Earth.</span><br/>
        <span>This is primal union.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who has achieved this state</span><br/>
        <span>Is unconcerned with friends and enemies,</span><br/>
        <span>With good and harm, with honor and disgrace.</span><br/>
        <span>This therefore is the highest state of man.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-57">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Rule a nation with justice.</span><br/>
        <span>Wage war with surprise moves.</span><br/>
        <span>Become master of the universe without striving.</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know that this is so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because of this!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The more laws and restrictions there are,</span><br/>
        <span>The poorer people become.</span><br/>
        <span>The sharper men’s weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>The more trouble in the land.</span><br/>
        <span>The more ingenious and clever men are,</span><br/>
        <span>The more strange things happen.</span><br/>
        <span>The more rules and regulations,</span><br/>
        <span>The more thieves and robbers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage says:</span><br/>
        <span>I take no action and people are reformed.</span><br/>
        <span>I enjoy peace and people become honest.</span><br/>
        <span>I do nothing and people become rich.</span><br/>
        <span>I have no desires and people return to the good and simple life.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-58">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the country is ruled with a light hand</span><br/>
        <span>The people are simple.</span><br/>
        <span>When the country is ruled with severity,</span><br/>
        <span>The people are cunning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Happiness is rooted in misery.</span><br/>
        <span>Misery lurks beneath happiness.</span><br/>
        <span>Who knows what the future holds?</span><br/>
        <span>There is no honesty.</span><br/>
        <span>Honesty becomes dishonest.</span><br/>
        <span>Goodness becomes witchcraft.</span><br/>
        <span>Man’s bewitchment lasts for a long time.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage is sharp but not cutting,</span><br/>
        <span>Pointed but not piercing,</span><br/>
        <span>Straightforward but not unrestrained,</span><br/>
        <span>Brilliant but not blinding.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-59">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In caring for others and serving heaven,</span><br/>
        <span>There is nothing like using restraint.</span><br/>
        <span>Restraint begins with giving up one’s own ideas.</span><br/>
        <span>This depends on Virtue gathered in the past.</span><br/>
        <span>If there is a good store of Virtue, then nothing is impossible.</span><br/>
        <span>If nothing is impossible, then there are no limits.</span><br/>
        <span>If a man knows no limits, then he is fit to be a ruler.</span><br/>
        <span>The mother principle of ruling holds good for a long time.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called having deep roots and a firm foundation,</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao of long life and eternal vision.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-60">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Ruling the country is like cooking a small fish.</span><br/>
        <span>Approach the universe with Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>And evil is not powerful,</span><br/>
        <span>But its power will not be used to harm others.</span><br/>
        <span>Not only will it do no harm to others,</span><br/>
        <span>But the sage himself will also be protected.</span><br/>
        <span>They do not hurt each other,</span><br/>
        <span>And the Virtue in each one refreshes both.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-61">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A great country is like low land.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the meeting ground of the universe,</span><br/>
        <span>The mother of the universe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The female overcomes the male with stillness,</span><br/>
        <span>Lying low in stillness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore if a great country gives way to a smaller country,</span><br/>
        <span>It will conquer the smaller country.</span><br/>
        <span>And if a small country submits to a great country,</span><br/>
        <span>It can conquer the great country.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore those who would conquer must yield,</span><br/>
        <span>And those who conquer do so because they yield.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A great nation needs more people;</span><br/>
        <span>A small country needs to serve.</span><br/>
        <span>Each gets what it wants.</span><br/>
        <span>It is fitting for a great nation to yield.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-62">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Tao is source of the ten thousand things.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the treasure of the good man, and the refuge of the bad.</span><br/>
        <span>Sweet words can buy honor;</span><br/>
        <span>Good deeds can gain respect.</span><br/>
        <span>If a man is bad, do not abandon him.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore on the day the emperor is crowned,</span><br/>
        <span>Or the three officers of state installed,</span><br/>
        <span>Do not send a gift of jade and a team of four horses,</span><br/>
        <span>But remain still and offer the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Why does everyone like the Tao so much at first?</span><br/>
        <span>Isn’t it because you find what you seek and are forgiven when you sin?</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore this is the greatest treasure of the universe.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-63">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Practice non-action.</span><br/>
        <span>Work without doing.</span><br/>
        <span>Taste the tasteless.</span><br/>
        <span>Magnify the small, increase the few.</span><br/>
        <span>Reward bitterness with care.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>See simplicity in the complicated.</span><br/>
        <span>Achieve greatness in little things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the universe the difficult things are done as if they are easy.</span><br/>
        <span>In the universe great acts are made up of small deeds.</span><br/>
        <span>The sage does not attempt anything very big,</span><br/>
        <span>And thus achieved greatness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Easy promises make for little trust.</span><br/>
        <span>Taking things lightly results in great difficulty.</span><br/>
        <span>Because the sage always confronts difficulties,</span><br/>
        <span>He never experiences them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-64">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Peace is easily maintained;</span><br/>
        <span>Trouble is easily overcome before it starts.</span><br/>
        <span>The brittle is easily shattered;</span><br/>
        <span>The small is easily scattered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Deal with it before it happens.</span><br/>
        <span>Set things in order before there is confusion.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A tree as great as a man’s embrace springs up from a small shoot;</span><br/>
        <span>A terrace nine stories high begins with a pile of earth;</span><br/>
        <span>A journey of a thousand miles starts under one’s feet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>He who acts defeats his own purpose;</span><br/>
        <span>He who grasps loses.</span><br/>
        <span>The sage does not act, and so is not defeated.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not grasp and therefore does not lose.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People usually fail when they are on the verge of success.</span><br/>
        <span>So give as much care to the end as to the beginning;</span><br/>
        <span>Then there will be no failure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage seeks freedom from desire.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not collect precious things.</span><br/>
        <span>He learns not to hold on to ideas.</span><br/>
        <span>He brings men back to what they have lost.</span><br/>
        <span>He help the ten thousand things find their own nature,</span><br/>
        <span>But refrains from action.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-65">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the beginning those who knew the</span><br/>
        <span>Tao did not try to enlighten others,</span><br/>
        <span>But kept it hidden.</span><br/>
        <span>Why is it so hard to rule?</span><br/>
        <span>Because people are so clever.</span><br/>
        <span>Rulers who try to use cleverness</span><br/>
        <span>Cheat the country.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who rule without cleverness</span><br/>
        <span>Are a blessing to the land.</span><br/>
        <span>These are the two alternatives.</span><br/>
        <span>Understanding these is Primal Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>Primal Virtue is deep and far.</span><br/>
        <span>It leads all things back</span><br/>
        <span>Toward the great oneness.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-66">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why is the sea king of a hundred streams?</span><br/>
        <span>Because it lies below them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore it is the king of a hundred streams.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If the sage would guide the people, he must serve with humility.</span><br/>
        <span>If he would lead them, he must follow behind.</span><br/>
        <span>In this way when the sage rules, the people will not feel oppressed;</span><br/>
        <span>When he stands before them, they will not be harmed.</span><br/>
        <span>The whole world will support him and will not tire of him.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Because he does not compete,</span><br/>
        <span>He does not meet competition.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-67">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everyone under heaven says that my</span><br/>
        <span>Tao is great and beyond compare.</span><br/>
        <span>Because it is great, it seems different.</span><br/>
        <span>If it were not different, it would have vanished long ago.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I have three treasures which I hold and keep.</span><br/>
        <span>The first is mercy; the second is economy;</span><br/>
        <span>The third is daring not to be ahead of others.</span><br/>
        <span>From mercy comes courage; from economy comes generosity;</span><br/>
        <span>From humility comes leadership.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nowadays men shun mercy, but try to be brave;</span><br/>
        <span>They abandon economy, but try to be generous;</span><br/>
        <span>They do not believe in humility, but always try to be first.</span><br/>
        <span>This is certain death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Mercy brings victory in battle and strength in defense.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the means by which heaven saves and guards.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-68">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A good soldier is not violent.</span><br/>
        <span>A good fighter is not angry.</span><br/>
        <span>A good winner is not vengeful</span><br/>
        <span>A good employer is humble.</span><br/>
        <span>This is known as the Virtue of not striving.</span><br/>
        <span>This is known as ability to deal with people.</span><br/>
        <span>This since ancient times has been known as the ultimate unity with heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-69">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is a saying among soldiers:</span><br/>
        <span>I dare not make the first move but would rather play the guest;</span><br/>
        <span>I dare not advance and inch but would rather withdraw a foot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called marching without appearing to move,</span><br/>
        <span>Rolling up your sleeves without showing your arm,</span><br/>
        <span>Capturing the enemy without attacking,</span><br/>
        <span>Being armed without weapons.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is no greater catastrophe than underestimating the enemy.</span><br/>
        <span>By underestimating the enemy, I almost lost what I value.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore when the battle is joined,</span><br/>
        <span>The underdog will win.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-70">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words are easy to understand and easy to perform,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no man under heaven knows them or practices them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words have ancient beginnings.</span><br/>
        <span>My actions are disciplined.</span><br/>
        <span>Because men do not understand, they have no knowledge of me.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those that know me are few;</span><br/>
        <span>Those that abuse me are honored.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the sage wears rough clothing and holds the jewel in his heart.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-71">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing ignorance is strength.</span><br/>
        <span>Ignoring knowledge is sickness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If one is sick of sickness, then one is not sick.</span><br/>
        <span>The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore he is not sick.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-72">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When men lack a sense of awe, there will be disaster.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do not intrude in their homes.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not harass them at work.</span><br/>
        <span>If you do not interfere, they will not weary of you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage knows himself but makes no show,</span><br/>
        <span>Has self-respect but is not arrogant.</span><br/>
        <span>He lets go of that and chooses this.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-73">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A brave and passionate man will kill or be killed.</span><br/>
        <span>A brave and calm man will always preserve life.</span><br/>
        <span>Of these two which is good and which is harmful?</span><br/>
        <span>Some things are not favored by heaven. Who knows why?</span><br/>
        <span>Even the sage is unsure of this.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao of heaven does not strive, and yet it overcomes.</span><br/>
        <span>It does not speak, and yet is answered.</span><br/>
        <span>It does not ask, yet is supplied with all its needs.</span><br/>
        <span>It seems to have no aim and yet its purpose is fulfilled.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven’s net casts wide.</span><br/>
        <span>Though its meshes are course, nothing slips through.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-74">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If men are not afraid to die,</span><br/>
        <span>It is no avail to threaten them with death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If men live in constant fear of dying,</span><br/>
        <span>And if breaking the law means that a man will be killed,</span><br/>
        <span>Who will dare to break the law?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is always an official executioner.</span><br/>
        <span>If you try to take his place,</span><br/>
        <span>It is like trying to be a master carpenter and cutting wood.</span><br/>
        <span>If you try to cut wood like a master carpenter, you will only hurt your hand.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-75">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why are the people starving?</span><br/>
        <span>Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the people are starving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why are the people rebellious?</span><br/>
        <span>Because the rulers interfere too much.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore they are rebellious.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why do the people think so little of death?</span><br/>
        <span>Because the rulers demand too much of life.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the people take death lightly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Having little to live on, one knows better than to value life too much.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-76">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A man is born gentle and weak.</span><br/>
        <span>At his death he is hard and stiff.</span><br/>
        <span>Green plants are tender and filled with sap.</span><br/>
        <span>At their death they are withered and dry.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the stiff and unbending is the disciple of death.</span><br/>
        <span>The gentle and yielding is the disciple of life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus an army without flexibility never wins a battle.</span><br/>
        <span>A tree that is unbending is easily broken.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The hard and strong will fall.</span><br/>
        <span>The soft and weak will overcome.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-77">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao of heaven is like the bending of a bow.</span><br/>
        <span>The high is lowered, and the low is raised.</span><br/>
        <span>If the string is too long, it is shortened;</span><br/>
        <span>If there is not enough, it is made longer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao of heaven is to take from those who have too much and give to those who do not have enough.</span><br/>
        <span>Man’s way is different.</span><br/>
        <span>He takes from those who do not have enough and give to those who already have too much.</span><br/>
        <span>What man has more than enough and gives it to the world?</span><br/>
        <span>Only the man of Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore the sage works without recognition.</span><br/>
        <span>He achieves what has to be done without dwelling on it.</span><br/>
        <span>He does not try to show his knowledge.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-78">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet for attacking the solid and strong, nothing is better;</span><br/>
        <span>It has no equal.</span><br/>
        <span>The weak can overcome the strong;</span><br/>
        <span>The supple can overcome the stiff.</span><br/>
        <span>Under heaven everyone knows this,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one puts it into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the sage says:</span><br/>
        <span>He who takes upon himself the humiliation of the people is fit to rule them.</span><br/>
        <span>He who takes upon himself the country’s disasters deserves to be king of the universe.</span><br/>
        <span>The truth often sounds paradoxical.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-79">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>After a bitter quarrel, some resentment must remain.</span><br/>
        <span>What can one do about it?</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore the sage keeps his half of the bargain</span><br/>
        <span>But does not exact his due.</span><br/>
        <span>A man of Virtue performs his part,</span><br/>
        <span>But a man without Virtue requires others to fulfill their obligations.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao of heaven is impartial.</span><br/>
        <span>It stays with good men all the time.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-80">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A small country has fewer people.</span><br/>
        <span>Though there are machines that can work ten to a hundred times faster than man, they are not needed.</span><br/>
        <span>The people take death seriously and do not travel far.</span><br/>
        <span>Though they have boats and carriages, no one uses them.</span><br/>
        <span>Though they have armor and weapons, no one displays them.</span><br/>
        <span>Men return to the knotting of rope in place of writing.</span><br/>
        <span>Their food is plain and good, their clothes fine but simple, their homes secure;</span><br/>
        <span>They are happy in their ways.</span><br/>
        <span>Though they live within sight of their neighbors,</span><br/>
        <span>And crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard across the way,</span><br/>
        <span>Yet they leave each other in peace while they grow old and die.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-81">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Truthful words are not beautiful.</span><br/>
        <span>Beautiful words are not truthful.</span><br/>
        <span>Good men do not argue.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who argue are not good.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who know are not learned.</span><br/>
        <span>The learned do not know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The sage never tries to store things up.</span><br/>
        <span>The more he does for others, the more he has.</span><br/>
        <span>The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao of heaven is pointed but does no harm.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao of the sage is work without effort.</span>
    </p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
