<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>Tao Te Ching</title>
    <meta name="author" content="Lao Tzu"/>
    <meta name="translator" content="Tolbert McCarroll"/>
    <meta name="year" content="1982"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <link href="../local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-01">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao that can be spoken of is not the eternal Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>The name that can be named is not the eternal name.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.</span><br/>
        <span>The name is the mother of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Send your desires away and you will see the mystery.</span><br/>
        <span>Be filled with desire</span><br/>
        <span>and you will see only the manifestation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>As these two come forth they differ in name.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet at their source they are the same.</span><br/>
        <span>This source is called a mystery.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Darkness within darkness,</span><br/>
        <span>the gateway to all mystery.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-02">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All under heaven see beauty as beauty</span><br/>
        <span>only because they also see ugliness.</span><br/>
        <span>All announce that good is good</span><br/>
        <span>only because they also denounce what is bad.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, something and nothing give birth to one another.</span><br/>
        <span>Difficult and easy complete one another.</span><br/>
        <span>Long and short fashion one another.</span><br/>
        <span>High and low arise from one another.</span><br/>
        <span>Notes and tones harmonize with one another.</span><br/>
        <span>Front and back follow one another.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus, the True Person acts without striving</span><br/>
        <span>and teaches without words.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Deny nothing to the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nourish them without claiming authority,</span><br/>
        <span>Benefit them without demanding gratitude,</span><br/>
        <span>Do the work, then move on.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>And, the fruits of your labor will last forever.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-03">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Not exalting the talented prevents rivalry.</span><br/>
        <span>Not valuing goods that are hard to obtain</span><br/>
        <span>prevents stealing.</span><br/>
        <span>Not displaying desirable things</span><br/>
        <span>prevents confusion of the heart.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person governs by</span><br/>
        <span>emptying the heart of desire</span><br/>
        <span>and filling the belly with food,</span><br/>
        <span>weakening ambitions</span><br/>
        <span>and strengthening bones.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If the people are simple and free from desire,</span><br/>
        <span>then the clever ones never dare to interfere.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Practice action without striving</span><br/>
        <span>and all will be in order.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-04">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is like an empty bowl,</span><br/>
        <span>yet it may be used</span><br/>
        <span>without ever needing to be filled.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the deep and unfathomable source</span><br/>
        <span>of the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Blunt the sharpness.</span><br/>
        <span>Untie the knot.</span><br/>
        <span>Soften the glare.</span><br/>
        <span>Settle with the dust.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is hidden deep yet ever present.</span><br/>
        <span>I do not know whose child it is.</span><br/>
        <span>It existed before the common ancestor.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-05">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth are not moved</span><br/>
        <span>by offerings of straw-dogs.</span><br/>
        <span>The Trne Person is not moved</span><br/>
        <span>by offerings of straw-dogs.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The space between heaven and earth is like a bellows.</span><br/>
        <span>It is empty and yet never exhausted.</span><br/>
        <span>The more it works the more comes out.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Many words lead to exhaustion.</span><br/>
        <span>Better to hold fast to your center.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-06">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The valley spirit never dies.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the unknown first mother,</span><br/>
        <span>whose gate is the root</span><br/>
        <span>from which grew heaven and earth.</span><br/>
        <span>It is dimly seen, yet always present.</span><br/>
        <span>Draw from it all you wish;</span><br/>
        <span>it will never run dry.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-07">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven and earth last forever.</span><br/>
        <span>The reason why heaven and earth last forever</span><br/>
        <span>is that they do not live for themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>Hence, they last forever.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person</span><br/>
        <span>leaves self behind</span><br/>
        <span>and thus is found in front,</span><br/>
        <span>is not guarded and thus is preserved,</span><br/>
        <span>is self-free and thus is able</span><br/>
        <span>to find fulfillment.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-08">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The highest good is like water.</span><br/>
        <span>For water benefits the ten thousand things without striving.</span><br/>
        <span>It settles in places that people avoid</span><br/>
        <span>and so is like the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In choosing your horne look to the land.</span><br/>
        <span>In preparing your heart go deep.</span><br/>
        <span>In associating with others value gentleness.</span><br/>
        <span>In speaking exhibit good faith.</span><br/>
        <span>In governing pruvide good order.</span><br/>
        <span>In the conduct of business be competent.</span><br/>
        <span>In action be timely.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Then there is no strife, nothing goes amiss.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-09">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Better to stop in time than to fill to the brim.</span><br/>
        <span>Hone a blade to the sharpest point,</span><br/>
        <span>and it will soon be blunt.</span><br/>
        <span>Fill your house with gold and jade,</span><br/>
        <span>and no one can protect it.</span><br/>
        <span>Be prideful about wealth and position,</span><br/>
        <span>and you bring disasters upon yourself.</span><br/>
        <span>Retire when the work is done.</span><br/>
        <span>This is the way of heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-10">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>While carrying your active life on your head</span><br/>
        <span>can you embrace the quiet spirit in your arms,</span><br/>
        <span>and not let go?</span><br/>
        <span>While being fully focused on vour vital breath</span><br/>
        <span>can you make it soft like that of a newborn babe?</span><br/>
        <span>While cleaning your inner mirror</span><br/>
        <span>can you leave it without blemish?</span><br/>
        <span>While loving the people and ruling the country</span><br/>
        <span>can you dispense with cleverness?</span><br/>
        <span>While opening and closing the gates of heaven</span><br/>
        <span>can you be like a mother bird?</span><br/>
        <span>While penetrating the four quarters with your insight</span><br/>
        <span>can you remain simple?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Help the people live!</span><br/>
        <span>Nourish the people!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Help them live yet lay no claim to them.</span><br/>
        <span>Benefit them yet seek no gratitude.</span><br/>
        <span>Guide thern yet do not control them.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called the hidden Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-11">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thirty spokes connect to the wheel’s hub;</span><br/>
        <span>yet, it is the center hole</span><br/>
        <span>that makes it useful.</span><br/>
        <span>Clay is shaped into a vessel;</span><br/>
        <span>yet, it is the emptiness within</span><br/>
        <span>that makes it useful.</span><br/>
        <span>Doors and windows are cut for a room;</span><br/>
        <span>yet it is the space where there is nothing</span><br/>
        <span>that makes it useful.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, though advantage comes from what is;</span><br/>
        <span>usefulness comes from what is not.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-12">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The five colors blind the eye.</span><br/>
        <span>The five notes deafen the ear.</span><br/>
        <span>The five flavors dull the palate.</span><br/>
        <span>Racing and hunting drive the heart wild.</span><br/>
        <span>Goods that are hard to obtain hinder the journey.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person</span><br/>
        <span>is guided more by the belly than the eye,</span><br/>
        <span>and prefers this within to that without.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-13">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Both favor and disgrace bring fear.</span><br/>
        <span>Great trouble comes from having a body.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is meant by:</span><br/>
        <span>“Both favor and disgrace bring fear”?</span><br/>
        <span>Favor leads to a fear of losing it and</span><br/>
        <span>disgrace leads to a fear of greater trouble.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is meant by:</span><br/>
        <span>“Great trouble comes from having a body”?</span><br/>
        <span>The reason you have trouble is that</span><br/>
        <span>you are self-conscious.</span><br/>
        <span>No trouble can befall a self-free person.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, surrender your self-interest.</span><br/>
        <span>Love others as much as you love yourself.</span><br/>
        <span>Then you can be entrusted with all things under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-14">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Look at it, you cannot see it.</span><br/>
        <span>It is invisible.</span><br/>
        <span>Listen to it, you cannot hear it.</span><br/>
        <span>It is inaudible.</span><br/>
        <span>Reach for it, you cannot grasp it.</span><br/>
        <span>It is intangible.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These three qualities are unfathomable</span><br/>
        <span>and so they fuse together and become one.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The upper part is not bright.</span><br/>
        <span>The lower part is not dark.</span><br/>
        <span>Ceaselessly the Unnamed moves back to nothingness.</span><br/>
        <span>It has the form of the formless,</span><br/>
        <span>the image of the imageless.</span><br/>
        <span>It is indefinable and shadowy.</span><br/>
        <span>Go up to it and you will not see its front.</span><br/>
        <span>Follow it and you will not see its back.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Yet, hold fast to this ancient Tao and</span><br/>
        <span>you will experience the present now-moment.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Know its beginnings and</span><br/>
        <span>you can follow the path of the Tao.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-15">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ancient followers of the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>were subtle, mysterious, and penetrating.</span><br/>
        <span>They were too deep to be fathomed.</span><br/>
        <span>All we can do is describe their appearance.</span><br/>
        <span>Hesitant, as if crossing a winter stream.</span><br/>
        <span>Watchful, as if aware of neighbors on all sides.</span><br/>
        <span>Respectful, like a visiting guest.</span><br/>
        <span>Yielding, like ice beginning to melt.</span><br/>
        <span>Simple, like an uncarved block.</span><br/>
        <span>Open, like a valley.</span><br/>
        <span>Obscure, like muddy water.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who else can be still and let the muddy water</span><br/>
        <span>slowly become clear?</span><br/>
        <span>Who else can remain at rest and slowly come to life?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who hold fast to the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>do not try to fill themselves to the brim.</span><br/>
        <span>Because thev do not try to be full</span><br/>
        <span>they can be worn out and yet ever new.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-16">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Empty everything out;</span><br/>
        <span>hold fast to your stillness.</span><br/>
        <span>Even though all things are stirring together,</span><br/>
        <span>watch for the movement of return.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things flourish and then</span><br/>
        <span>each returns to the root from which it came.</span><br/>
        <span>Returning to the root is stillness.</span><br/>
        <span>Through stillness each fulfills its destiny.</span><br/>
        <span>That which has fulfilled its destiny</span><br/>
        <span>becomes part of the Always-so.</span><br/>
        <span>To be aware of the Always-so is to awaken.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who innovate while in ignorance of the Always-so</span><br/>
        <span>move toward disaster.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who act wirh awareness of the Always-so</span><br/>
        <span>embrace all, are not possessed by particular desire</span><br/>
        <span>and move toward the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who are at one with the Tao abide forever.</span><br/>
        <span>Even after their bodies waste away,</span><br/>
        <span>they are safe and whole.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-17">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The best leader is one whose existence</span><br/>
        <span>is barely known by the people.</span><br/>
        <span>Next comes one whom they love and praise.</span><br/>
        <span>Next comes one they fear.</span><br/>
        <span>Next comes one they defy.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you do not trust enough, you will not be trusted.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True Persons do not offer words lightly.</span><br/>
        <span>When their task is accomplished</span><br/>
        <span>and their work is completed,</span><br/>
        <span>the people say, “It happened to us naturally.”</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-18">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the great Tao is forgotten,</span><br/>
        <span>benevolence and moral codes arise.</span><br/>
        <span>When shrewdness and cleverness appear,</span><br/>
        <span>great hypocrisy follows.</span><br/>
        <span>When there is no harmony in the family,</span><br/>
        <span>filial manners are developed</span><br/>
        <span>When the country is in disorder,</span><br/>
        <span>ministers appear as loyal servants.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-19">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Stop being learned and your troubles will end.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up wisdom, discard cleverness,</span><br/>
        <span>and the people will benefit a hundredfold.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up benevolence, discard moral judgments,</span><br/>
        <span>and the people will rediscover natural compassion.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Give up shrewdness, discard gain,</span><br/>
        <span>and thieves and robbers will disappear.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>These three false adornments are not enough to live by.</span><br/>
        <span>They must give way to something more solid.</span><br/>
        <span>Look for what is simple and hold onto the Uncarved Block.</span><br/>
        <span>Diminish thoughts of self and restrain desires.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-20">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How great is the difference between “yea” and “yeah”?</span><br/>
        <span>How great is the distinction between “good” and “evil”?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Must I fear what others fear? How silly!</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everyone else is joyous as if enjoying the greatest feast,</span><br/>
        <span>or going up the terraces in spring.</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am drifting without direction,</span><br/>
        <span>like a baby who has not yet smiled.</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am moping as if I had no home.</span><br/>
        <span>Everyone else has more than they need,</span><br/>
        <span>I alone seem in want.</span><br/>
        <span>I have the mind of a fool, how confused I am!</span><br/>
        <span>Other people are bright and clever,</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am dark.</span><br/>
        <span>Other people are alert and self-assured,</span><br/>
        <span>If alone am dull and muddled.</span><br/>
        <span>I am unsettled like the waves of the sea,</span><br/>
        <span>like the restless wind.</span><br/>
        <span>Everyone else has a purpose,</span><br/>
        <span>I alone am stubborn and awkward.</span><br/>
        <span>I am different from other people,</span><br/>
        <span>Even so, I am nourished by the Great</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-21">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Great Virtue is to follow the Tao and only the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is shadowy and intangible.</span><br/>
        <span>Intangible and evasive, and yet within it is a form.</span><br/>
        <span>Evasive and intangible, and yet within it is a substance.</span><br/>
        <span>Shadowy and dark, and vet within it is a vital force.</span><br/>
        <span>This vital force is real and can be relied upon.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>From ancient times to the present the Tao’s instructions</span><br/>
        <span>have not been forgotten.</span><br/>
        <span>Through it can be perceived the beginning of the story</span><br/>
        <span>of life.</span><br/>
        <span>How do I know how it was at the beginning of the story</span><br/>
        <span>of life?</span><br/>
        <span>Because of what is within me.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-22">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Yield and overcome;</span><br/>
        <span>bend and be straight.</span><br/>
        <span>Empty out and be full;</span><br/>
        <span>wear out and be renewed.</span><br/>
        <span>Have little and gain;</span><br/>
        <span>have much and be confused.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person embraces the One</span><br/>
        <span>and becorrles a model for all.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do not look only at yourself,</span><br/>
        <span>and you will see much.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not justify yourself,</span><br/>
        <span>and you will be distinguished.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not brag,</span><br/>
        <span>and you will have merit.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not be prideful,</span><br/>
        <span>and your work will endure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is because you do not strive</span><br/>
        <span>that no one under heaven can strive with you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The saying of the Old Ones, “Yield and Overcome,”</span><br/>
        <span>is not an empty phrase.</span><br/>
        <span>True wholeness is achieved</span><br/>
        <span>by blending with life.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-23">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To talk little is to follow nature.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A whirlwind does not last all morning.</span><br/>
        <span>A sudden shower does not last all day.</span><br/>
        <span>Who produces these things?</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven and earth!</span><br/>
        <span>Even heaven and earth cannot make</span><br/>
        <span>wild things last long.</span><br/>
        <span>How then can people hope to do so?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People of the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>conform to the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>People of Virtue</span><br/>
        <span>conform to Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>People who lose the way</span><br/>
        <span>conform to the loss.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who conform to the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>are welcomed into the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who conform to Virtue</span><br/>
        <span>are welcomed into Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who conform to the loss</span><br/>
        <span>are welcomed into the loss.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who do not trust enough</span><br/>
        <span>will not be trusted.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-24">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The person on tiptoe is not steady.</span><br/>
        <span>The person with legs astride cannot walk.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who look only at thernselves see little.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who justify themselves are not distinguished.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who brag have no merit.</span><br/>
        <span>The work of prideful people will not endure.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>From the standpoint of the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>these things are</span><br/>
        <span>“excessive food and tumors of the body.”</span><br/>
        <span>As they bring sickness, followers of the Tao do not linger around them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-25">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Something formless yet complete,</span><br/>
        <span>existing before heaven and earth.</span><br/>
        <span>Silent and limitless,</span><br/>
        <span>it stands alone and does not change.</span><br/>
        <span>Reaching everywhere, it does not tire.</span><br/>
        <span>Perhaps it is the Mother of all things under heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>I do not know its name</span><br/>
        <span>so I call it “Tao.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When I have to describe it I call it “great.”</span><br/>
        <span>Being great it flows.</span><br/>
        <span>It flows far away.</span><br/>
        <span>Having gone far away, it returns.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the Tao is great.</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven is great.</span><br/>
        <span>Earth is great.</span><br/>
        <span>People are also great.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, people constitute one of the</span><br/>
        <span>four great things of the universe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People conform to the earth.</span><br/>
        <span>The earth conforms to heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven conforms to the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>The Tao conforms to its own nature.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-26">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Whe solid must be the root of the light.</span><br/>
        <span>The still must be the master of thc restless.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, wise people when traveling all day</span><br/>
        <span>do not lose sight of their baggage cart.</span><br/>
        <span>Although there are beautiful scenes to see,</span><br/>
        <span>they remain quietly in their own place.</span><br/>
        <span>Should a lord of ten thousand chariots</span><br/>
        <span>appear more frivolous than a simple traveler?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To be light is to lose the root.</span><br/>
        <span>To be restless is to lose the master.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-27">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A skillful traveler leaves no track.</span><br/>
        <span>A skillful speaker makes no slip.</span><br/>
        <span>A skillful reckoner needs no counting rod.</span><br/>
        <span>A skillfully made door requires no bolts,</span><br/>
        <span>yet it cannot be opened.</span><br/>
        <span>A skillful binding has no cords or knots,</span><br/>
        <span>yet it cannot be untied.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person is skillful in assisting people,</span><br/>
        <span>and abandons nobody;</span><br/>
        <span>In skillful in assisting things,</span><br/>
        <span>and abandons nothing.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called “Following the lnner Light.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the skillful person is the teacher</span><br/>
        <span>of the person without skill.</span><br/>
        <span>The person withont skill is the material</span><br/>
        <span>for the skillfirl person.</span><br/>
        <span>If you do not respect the teacher,</span><br/>
        <span>if you do not care for the material,</span><br/>
        <span>you are on the road to confusion</span><br/>
        <span>and your cleverness will not save you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is an essential principle.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-28">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Develop the strength of a man,</span><br/>
        <span>but live as gently as a woman.</span><br/>
        <span>Become a brook and receive all things under heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>If you are such a brook</span><br/>
        <span>then Virtue will constantly flow into you</span><br/>
        <span>and you will become a simple child again.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Know thew pure</span><br/>
        <span>but live the life of the sullied.</span><br/>
        <span>Become a fountain to all things under heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>If you bccome such a fountain</span><br/>
        <span>then you will have abundant Virtue</span><br/>
        <span>and you will return to the state of the Uncarved Block.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the Uncarved Block is cut up into pieces,</span><br/>
        <span>it is turned into specialized instruments.</span><br/>
        <span>But the True Person makes use of it whole</span><br/>
        <span>and becomes the master of the instruments.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, it is said, “The finest carver cuts little.”</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-29">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Whoever wishes to take over the world</span><br/>
        <span>will not succeed.</span><br/>
        <span>The world is a sacred vessel</span><br/>
        <span>and nothing should be done to it.</span><br/>
        <span>Whoever tries to tamper with it</span><br/>
        <span>will mar it.</span><br/>
        <span>Whoever tries to grab it</span><br/>
        <span>will lose it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, there is a time to go ahead</span><br/>
        <span>and a tirne to stay behind.</span><br/>
        <span>There is a time to breathe easy</span><br/>
        <span>and a time to breathe hard.</span><br/>
        <span>There is a tirne to be vigorous</span><br/>
        <span>and a tirrle to be gentle.</span><br/>
        <span>There is a tine to gather</span><br/>
        <span>and a time to release.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person avoids extremes,</span><br/>
        <span>self-indulgence, and extravagance.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-30">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If you would assist leaders of people</span><br/>
        <span>by way of the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>you will oppose the use of armed force to overpower</span><br/>
        <span>the world.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who use weapons will be harmed by them.</span><br/>
        <span>Where troops have camped only thorn bushes grow.</span><br/>
        <span>Bad harvests follow in the wake of a great army.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The skillful person strikes the blow and stops,</span><br/>
        <span>without taking advantage of victory.</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it to a conclusion but do not be vain.</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it to a conclusion but do not be boastful.</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it to a conclusion but do not be arrogant.</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it to a conclusion but only when there is no choice.</span><br/>
        <span>Bring it to a conclusion but without violence.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When force is rlsed, youthful strength decays.</span><br/>
        <span>This is not the way of Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>And that which goes against the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>will quickly pass away.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-31">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Weapons are ill-omened things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Among gentle people the left side</span><br/>
        <span>is the place of honor when at home,</span><br/>
        <span>but in war the right side is the place of honor.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Weapons are not proper instruments for gentle people;</span><br/>
        <span>they use them only when they have no other choice.</span><br/>
        <span>Peace and quiet are what they value.</span><br/>
        <span>They do not glory in victory.</span><br/>
        <span>to glorify it is to delight in the slaughter of people.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who delight in the slaughter of people will</span><br/>
        <span>never thrive among all that dwell under heaven.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The army that has killed people</span><br/>
        <span>should be received with sorrow.</span><br/>
        <span>Conquerors should be received with the rites of mourning.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-32">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is forever nameless.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Though the Uncarved Block is small,</span><br/>
        <span>it is not inferior to anything under heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>lf leaders could keep hold of it,</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things would submit to them freely.</span><br/>
        <span>Heaven and earth would unite and sweet dew would fall.</span><br/>
        <span>The people would live in harmony</span><br/>
        <span>without any law or decree.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Only when the Block is carved are there names.</span><br/>
        <span>As soon as there are names</span><br/>
        <span>it is timc to stop.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing when to stop prevents trouble.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All under heaven will return to the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>as brooks and streams flow home to the sea.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-33">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Knowing others is to be clever.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing yourself is to be enlightened.</span><br/>
        <span>Overcoming others requires force.</span><br/>
        <span>Overcoming yourself requires strength.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know that you have enough is to be rich.</span><br/>
        <span>Push through and you may get your way,</span><br/>
        <span>but return home and you will endure.</span><br/>
        <span>Live out your days and you have had a long life.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-34">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The great Tao covers everything like a flood.</span><br/>
        <span>lt flows to the left and to the right.</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things depend upon it</span><br/>
        <span>and it denies none of them.</span><br/>
        <span>It accomplishes its task yet claims no reward.</span><br/>
        <span>It clothes and feeds the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>yet it does not attempt to control them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, it may be called “the little.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things return to it,</span><br/>
        <span>even though it does not control them.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, it may be called “the great.”</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So it is that the True Person does not wish to be great</span><br/>
        <span>and therefore becomes truly great.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-35">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hold on to the Great Image</span><br/>
        <span>and all under heaven will approach you.</span><br/>
        <span>Coming to you and not being harmed,</span><br/>
        <span>they will find rest, peace, and security.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A passing guest will pause at the sound of music</span><br/>
        <span>and the smell of fancy food.</span><br/>
        <span>By comparison the Tao is mild and flavorless.</span><br/>
        <span>It is not solid enough to be seen,</span><br/>
        <span>nor loud enough to be heard.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet, it lasts forever.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-36">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>That which is to be shrunk</span><br/>
        <span>must first be stretched out.</span><br/>
        <span>That which is to be weakened</span><br/>
        <span>must first be strengthened.</span><br/>
        <span>That which is to be cast down</span><br/>
        <span>must first be raised up.</span><br/>
        <span>That which is to be taken</span><br/>
        <span>must first be given.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is wisdom in dimming your light.</span><br/>
        <span>For the soft and gentle</span><br/>
        <span>will overcome the hard and powerful.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Fish are best left in deep waters.</span><br/>
        <span>And, weapons are best kept out of sight.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-37">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao never strives,</span><br/>
        <span>yet nothing is left undone.</span><br/>
        <span>If leaders were able to adhere to it</span><br/>
        <span>the ten thousand things would develop</span><br/>
        <span>of their own accord.</span><br/>
        <span>If after they have developed</span><br/>
        <span>they experience desires to strive,</span><br/>
        <span>they can bury those desires</span><br/>
        <span>under the nameless Uncarved Block.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The nameless Uncarved Block can protect</span><br/>
        <span>against desire.</span><br/>
        <span>When desires are restrained there will be peace,</span><br/>
        <span>and then all under heaven will be at rest.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>THE SECOND BOOK: Te (Virtue)</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-38">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A person of high virtue is not conscious of virtue</span><br/>
        <span>and therefore possesses Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>A person of little virtue tries to be virtuous</span><br/>
        <span>and therefore lacks Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>A person of high vir-tue does not make a fuss</span><br/>
        <span>and is not seen.</span><br/>
        <span>A person of little virtue always makes a fuss</span><br/>
        <span>and is always seen.</span><br/>
        <span>A truly good person functions without ulterior motive.</span><br/>
        <span>A moralist acts out of private desires.</span><br/>
        <span>A ritualist acts and, when no one responds,</span><br/>
        <span>rolls up a sleeve and marches.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When we lose the Tao, we turn to Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>When we lose Virtue, we turn to kindness.</span><br/>
        <span>When we lose kindness, we turn to morality.</span><br/>
        <span>When we lose morality, we turn to ritual.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Ritual is the mere husk of good faith and loyalty</span><br/>
        <span>and the beginning of disorder.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowledge of what is to come</span><br/>
        <span>may be a flower of the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>but it is the beginning of folly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, the well-formed person relies on what is solid</span><br/>
        <span>and not on what is flimsy,</span><br/>
        <span>on the fruit and not the flower.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, such a person lets go of that without</span><br/>
        <span>and is cont:ent with this within.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-39">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>From ancient times these things have arisen from the One:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven is clear because of the One,</span><br/>
        <span>The earth is firm because of the One,</span><br/>
        <span>The Spirit is strong because of the One,</span><br/>
        <span>The valley is full because of thc One,</span><br/>
        <span>The ten thousand things reprodnce because of the One,</span><br/>
        <span>Leaders are able to lead because of the One.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All of this comes from the One.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If heaven were not clear it would soon split.</span><br/>
        <span>If the earth were not firm it would soon bend and break.</span><br/>
        <span>If the Spirit were not strong it would soon wear out.</span><br/>
        <span>If the valley were not full it would soon dry up.</span><br/>
        <span>If the ten thousand things did not reproduce</span><br/>
        <span>they would soon die out.</span><br/>
        <span>If leaders could not lead they would soon fall.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, greatness has its source in the little.</span><br/>
        <span>The low is the foundation of the high.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Princes call themselves “alone,” “helpless,” “worthless.”</span><br/>
        <span>Is this not acknowledging a humble root?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Enumerate the parts of a carriage</span><br/>
        <span>and you have not defined a carriage.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Better to resound like stone chimes</span><br/>
        <span>than to tinkle like jade bells.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-40">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Returning is the direction of the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>Yielding is the way of the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things are born of Being</span><br/>
        <span>and Being is born of Nonbeing.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-41">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The wise student on hearing the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>diligently puts it into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>The average student on hearing the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>keeps it one minute and loses it the next.</span><br/>
        <span>The mediocre student on hearing the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>laughs at it loudly.</span><br/>
        <span>If this student did not laugh it would not be the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the ancient proverb says:</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The bright path seems dull.</span><br/>
        <span>The path that goes torward seems to lead backward.</span><br/>
        <span>The even path seems up and down.</span><br/>
        <span>The greatest whiteness seems soiled.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>High Virtue seems like a canyon.</span><br/>
        <span>Abundant Virtue seems deficient.</span><br/>
        <span>Vigorous Virtue seems limp.</span><br/>
        <span>Simple Virtue seems faded.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The greatest square has no corners.</span><br/>
        <span>The greatest vessel takes long to complete.</span><br/>
        <span>The greatest note is hard to hear.</span><br/>
        <span>The greatest image has no shape.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is hidden and nameless;</span><br/>
        <span>yet, it is the Tao alone that supports all thing</span><br/>
        <span>and brings them to completion.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-42">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao gives birth to the One.</span><br/>
        <span>The One gives birth to two.</span><br/>
        <span>Two gives birth to three.</span><br/>
        <span>And three gives birth to the ten thousand things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ten thousand things have their backs in the shadow</span><br/>
        <span>while they embrace the light.</span><br/>
        <span>Harmony is achieved by blending</span><br/>
        <span>the breaths of these two forces.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People dislike the words “alone,” “helpless,” “worthless,”</span><br/>
        <span>yet this is how Princes describe them selves.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>So it is that sometimes a thing is increased</span><br/>
        <span>by being diminished and</span><br/>
        <span>diminished by being increased.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What others teach I also teach:</span><br/>
        <span>“A violent person will not die a natural death.”</span><br/>
        <span>I shall make this the basis of my teaching.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-43">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The most yielding of all things</span><br/>
        <span>overcomes the hardest of all things.</span><br/>
        <span>That which has no substance</span><br/>
        <span>enters where there is no crevice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, I know the value of action without striving.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Few things under heaven bring more benefit than</span><br/>
        <span>the lessons learned from silence and</span><br/>
        <span>the actions taken without striving.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-44">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Your integrity or your body:</span><br/>
        <span>Which is more important?</span><br/>
        <span>Your body or your possessions</span><br/>
        <span>Which is worth more?</span><br/>
        <span>Gain or loss:</span><br/>
        <span>Which is more harmful?</span><br/>
        <span>Thus it is that the miser will pay much.</span><br/>
        <span>The hoarder will suffer great loss.</span><br/>
        <span>Be content with what you have</span><br/>
        <span>and you will not be disgraced.</span><br/>
        <span>Know when to stop</span><br/>
        <span>and you will be preserved from danger.</span><br/>
        <span>Only in this way will you long endure.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-45">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great accomplishment seems incomplete,</span><br/>
        <span>yet its use is not impaired.</span><br/>
        <span>Great filllness seems empty,</span><br/>
        <span>yet it will never be drained.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Great straightness looks crooked.</span><br/>
        <span>Great skill appears clumsy.</span><br/>
        <span>Great eloquence sounds like stammering.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Movement overcomes cold,</span><br/>
        <span>stillness overcomes heat.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The calm and quiet set right</span><br/>
        <span>everything under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-46">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the Tao prevails in the world</span><br/>
        <span>swift horses are used to fertilize the fields.</span><br/>
        <span>When the Tao is unheeded</span><br/>
        <span>war horses are bred on the border lands.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is no greater offense than harboring desires.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no greater disaster than discontent.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no greater misfortune than wanting more.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, if you are content</span><br/>
        <span>You will always have enough.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-47">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Without going outside</span><br/>
        <span>you can know the ways of the world.</span><br/>
        <span>Without looking through the window</span><br/>
        <span>you can see the way of heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>The farther you go</span><br/>
        <span>the less you know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the Trne Person</span><br/>
        <span>arrives without traveling,</span><br/>
        <span>perceives without looking,</span><br/>
        <span>and acts without striving.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-48">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In the pursuit of learning,</span><br/>
        <span>every day something isadded.</span><br/>
        <span>In the pursuit of the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>every day something is dropped.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Less and less is done</span><br/>
        <span>until you come to action with striving.</span><br/>
        <span>When you follow this practice,</span><br/>
        <span>nothing remains undone.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All under heaven is won by</span><br/>
        <span>letting things take their cuurse.</span><br/>
        <span>Nothing can be gained by interfering.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-49">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The True Person does not have an individual heart</span><br/>
        <span>but uses the heart of the people.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I am kind to those who are kind.</span><br/>
        <span>I am also kind to those who are not kind.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, there is an increase in kindness.</span><br/>
        <span>I keep faith with those who are in good faith.</span><br/>
        <span>I also keep faith with those WhO lack good faith.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus, there is an increase of good faith.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The True Person is detached and humble</span><br/>
        <span>and to the world appears confusing.</span><br/>
        <span>The people all strain their eyes and ears, yet the True Person remains childlike.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-50">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When going off one way means living</span><br/>
        <span>and going off the other way means dying,</span><br/>
        <span>three in ten are companions of Life,</span><br/>
        <span>three in ten are companions of Death, and</span><br/>
        <span>three in ten value Life but drift toward Death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why is all this so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because, these people are too greedy about living.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is said:</span><br/>
        <span>People who are skillful in caring</span><br/>
        <span>for the life that has been given to them</span><br/>
        <span>travel abroad without fear of wild ox or tiger,</span><br/>
        <span>and enter a battle without concern for sharp weapons.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no place for the wild ox to thrust its horns,</span><br/>
        <span>there is no place for the tiger to put its claws,</span><br/>
        <span>there is no place for a weapon to lodge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How is this so?</span><br/>
        <span>Because, there is no place for Death to enter in!</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-51">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao gives life to all things,</span><br/>
        <span>and its Virtue nourishes them,</span><br/>
        <span>forms each according to its nature</span><br/>
        <span>and gives to each its inner strengrth.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the ten thousand things all venerate the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>and honor its Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>It has never bccn decreed that the Tao be venerated</span><br/>
        <span>and its Virtue be honored;</span><br/>
        <span>they have always been so treated spontaneously.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus, the Tao gives life to all things;</span><br/>
        <span>and its Virtue raises them, nourishes them,</span><br/>
        <span>brings them to their full growth,</span><br/>
        <span>feeds, shelters, and protects them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Giving life without claiming authority,</span><br/>
        <span>benefiting without demanding gratitude,</span><br/>
        <span>guiding without control.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called hidden Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-52">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All things under heaven had a common beginning,</span><br/>
        <span>and that beginning could be considered</span><br/>
        <span>the Mother of all things.</span><br/>
        <span>When you know the Mother</span><br/>
        <span>you will also know the children.</span><br/>
        <span>Know the children, yet hold fast to the Mother,</span><br/>
        <span>and to the end of your days</span><br/>
        <span>you will be free from danger.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Block the passages!</span><br/>
        <span>Shut the doors!</span><br/>
        <span>And, to the end of your days</span><br/>
        <span>your strength will not fail you.</span><br/>
        <span>Open the passages!</span><br/>
        <span>Increase your activities!</span><br/>
        <span>And, to the end of your days</span><br/>
        <span>you will be beyond help.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>See the small and develop clear vision.</span><br/>
        <span>Practice yielding and develop strength.</span><br/>
        <span>Use the outer light to return to the inner light,</span><br/>
        <span>and save yourself from harm.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is known as following the Always-so.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-53">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If I have even little sense,</span><br/>
        <span>I will walk upon the great path of Tao</span><br/>
        <span>and only fear straying from it.</span><br/>
        <span>This Great Way is straight and smooth</span><br/>
        <span>yet people often prefer the side roads.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The courtyard is well kept</span><br/>
        <span>but the fields are full of weeds,</span><br/>
        <span>and the granaries stand empty.</span><br/>
        <span>Still, there are those of us</span><br/>
        <span>who wear elegant clothes, carry sharp swords,</span><br/>
        <span>pamper ourselvcs with food and drink</span><br/>
        <span>and have more possessions than we can use.</span><br/>
        <span>These are the actions of robbers.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is certainly far from the Tao.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-54">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>What is well rooted cannot be pulled up.</span><br/>
        <span>What is firmly grasped will not slip loose.</span><br/>
        <span>It will be honored from generatlon to generation.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When cultivated in your person, Virtue will be real.</span><br/>
        <span>When cultivated in your household, Virtue will be plentiful.</span><br/>
        <span>When cultivated in your village, Virtue will endure.</span><br/>
        <span>When cultivated in your country, Virtue will abound.</span><br/>
        <span>When cultivated in your world, Virtue will be universal.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, through yourself look at Self.</span><br/>
        <span>Through your household look at Household.</span><br/>
        <span>Through your community look at Community.</span><br/>
        <span>Through yonr country look at Country.</span><br/>
        <span>Through your world look at World.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know that the world is like this?</span><br/>
        <span>Because of what is within me.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-55">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A person who is filled with Virtue</span><br/>
        <span>is like a newborn child.</span><br/>
        <span>Poisonons insects will not sting,</span><br/>
        <span>wild animals will not pounce,</span><br/>
        <span>birds of prey will not swoop down.</span><br/>
        <span>Although bones are soft and sinews weak,</span><br/>
        <span>a child’s grip is firm.</span><br/>
        <span>The union of man and woman is not known,</span><br/>
        <span>yet there is completeness,</span><br/>
        <span>because a child’s vital force is at its height.</span><br/>
        <span>Crying all day will not produce hoarseness,</span><br/>
        <span>because there is perfect harmony.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>To know harmony is to know the Always-so.</span><br/>
        <span>To know the Always-so is to be awakened.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Trying to fill life to the brim invites a curse.</span><br/>
        <span>For the mind to Inake demands upon the breath of life</span><br/>
        <span>brings strain.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Whatever has been forced to a peak of vigor</span><br/>
        <span>approaches its decay.</span><br/>
        <span>This is not the way of Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>And that which goes against the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>will quickly pass away.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-56">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who know do not speak.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who speak do not know.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Block the passages!</span><br/>
        <span>Shut the doors!</span><br/>
        <span>Blunt the sharpness!</span><br/>
        <span>Untangle the knots!</span><br/>
        <span>Soften the glare!</span><br/>
        <span>Settle with the dust!</span><br/>
        <span>This is the Mystery of Evenness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Those who have achieved this cannot be enclosed</span><br/>
        <span>nor kept at a distance;</span><br/>
        <span>they cannot be bene fited nor harmed,</span><br/>
        <span>honored nor disgraced.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, this is the noblest state under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-57">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Govern the country by being straightforward.</span><br/>
        <span>Wage war by being crafty.</span><br/>
        <span>Win all under heaven by not meddling.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How do I know that this is so?</span><br/>
        <span>By what is within me.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The more restrictions there are,</span><br/>
        <span>the poorer are the people.</span><br/>
        <span>The more pointed the people’s weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>the more disorder there is in the country.</span><br/>
        <span>The more ingenious and clever the people,</span><br/>
        <span>the more strange the contrivances that appear.</span><br/>
        <span>The more laws and edicts that are posted,</span><br/>
        <span>the more thieves and robbers that arise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence an Old One has said:</span><br/>
        <span>I act without striving and the</span><br/>
        <span>people transform themselvey.</span><br/>
        <span>I love stillness and the</span><br/>
        <span>people straighten themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>I do not meddle and the</span><br/>
        <span>people prosper by themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>I am free from desires and the</span><br/>
        <span>people themselves return to the simplicily</span><br/>
        <span>of the Uncarved Block.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-58">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the government is unseen</span><br/>
        <span>the people are simple and happy.</span><br/>
        <span>When the government is lively</span><br/>
        <span>the people are cunning and discontented.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>On misery perches happiness.</span><br/>
        <span>Beneath happiness crouches misery.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Who knows when this will cease?</span><br/>
        <span>The straight changes into the crooked.</span><br/>
        <span>The good becomes the ominous.</span><br/>
        <span>Surely the people</span><br/>
        <span>have been confused for a long time.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person squares without cutting,</span><br/>
        <span>carves without hacking,</span><br/>
        <span>straightens without dislocating,</span><br/>
        <span>gives forth light without blinding.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-59">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>For governing others and serving heaven</span><br/>
        <span>there is nothing better than moderation.</span><br/>
        <span>A person who is moderate returns to the path.</span><br/>
        <span>Returning to the path brings an abundance of Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>This good store of Virtue cannot be conquered.</span><br/>
        <span>Virtue that cannot be conquered knows no limit.</span><br/>
        <span>Only a person who has lirnitiess Virtue is fit to lead.</span><br/>
        <span>Only the leader who possesses the Mother of the country</span><br/>
        <span>will long endure.</span><br/>
        <span>This is called making the roots go deep</span><br/>
        <span>by restraining the trunk.</span><br/>
        <span>Learn to focus your life and you will see many days.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-60">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Governing a big country is like cooking a small fish.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Let all under heaven be governed in accordance with the Tao,</span><br/>
        <span>and demons will not manifest their power.</span><br/>
        <span>It is not that they lack power</span><br/>
        <span>but rather they will not use their power</span><br/>
        <span>to harm the people.</span><br/>
        <span>They are not the only ones who have power</span><br/>
        <span>and do not use it to harm the people.</span><br/>
        <span>The True Person does not harm the people.</span><br/>
        <span>Whenever there is no harm done,</span><br/>
        <span>that power flows into the common Virtue.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-61">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A great country is like the low lands</span><br/>
        <span>where all the streams unite.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In all things under heaven</span><br/>
        <span>the female overcomes the male by her stillness,</span><br/>
        <span>and because she is still she lies below.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, if the great country will take the low place</span><br/>
        <span>it will win over the little country.</span><br/>
        <span>If the little country will take the low place</span><br/>
        <span>it will win over the great country.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus, the one gets below and prospers</span><br/>
        <span>and the other remains below and prospers.</span><br/>
        <span>All that the great country wants is more people.</span><br/>
        <span>All that the little country wants is a place</span><br/>
        <span>for its people to go and to be employed.</span><br/>
        <span>If each is to get what it wants</span><br/>
        <span>it is necessary for the great country</span><br/>
        <span>to take the low place.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-62">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao is to the ten thousand things</span><br/>
        <span>what the shrine is in the home.</span><br/>
        <span>It is the treasure of the virtuous</span><br/>
        <span>and the protection of the wrongdoer.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Good words are appreciated.</span><br/>
        <span>Good deeds deeds accepted as gifts.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Even the wrongdoers are not abandoned.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, on the day an Emperor is installed</span><br/>
        <span>and appoints the three ducal ministers.</span><br/>
        <span>remain where you are and make an offering of the Tao.</span><br/>
        <span>It will be preferable to a gift ofjade discs</span><br/>
        <span>followed by a team of fonr horses.</span><br/>
        <span>Why did the ancients value the Tao?</span><br/>
        <span>Was it not because through it</span><br/>
        <span>you can find what you seek,</span><br/>
        <span>and because of it</span><br/>
        <span>you can escape what is hounding you?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, it is the most valuable thing under heaven.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-63">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Act without striving.</span><br/>
        <span>Work without interfering.</span><br/>
        <span>Find the flavor in what is flavorless.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Enlarge the small, increase the few.</span><br/>
        <span>Heal injury with goodness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Handle the difficult while it is still easy.</span><br/>
        <span>Cultivate the great while it is still small.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>All difficult things begin as easy things.</span><br/>
        <span>All great things begin as small things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person never attempts anything great,</span><br/>
        <span>and accomplishes great things.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Lightly made promises inspire little faith.</span><br/>
        <span>Trying to make things easy results in great difficulties.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person regards everything as difficult,</span><br/>
        <span>and is never overcome by difficulties.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-64">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Peace is easily maintained while things are still at rest.</span><br/>
        <span>Trouble is easily handled before it starts.</span><br/>
        <span>What is brittle is easily broken.</span><br/>
        <span>What is minute is easily scattered.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Handle a problem before it appears.</span><br/>
        <span>Secure order before confusion begins.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A tree as big as a person’s embrace begins as a tiny shoot.</span><br/>
        <span>A terrace nine stories high rises from a shovelful of earth.</span><br/>
        <span>A journey of a thousand miles begins under your feet.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A person who interferes does harm,</span><br/>
        <span>and those who grasp lose their hold.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the True Person acts without striving and does no</span><br/>
        <span>harm,</span><br/>
        <span>avoids grabbing and never loses hold.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>People often ruin their ventures</span><br/>
        <span>when they are on the verge of success.</span><br/>
        <span>So, be as careful at the end as at the beginning,</span><br/>
        <span>and your work will not be ruined.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person seeks freedom from desire,</span><br/>
        <span>does not value things that are hard to come by,</span><br/>
        <span>learns without scholarship,</span><br/>
        <span>brings people back to what they have passed by,</span><br/>
        <span>and assists the ten thousand things to find their own</span><br/>
        <span>natures;</span><br/>
        <span>all without daring to interfere.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-65">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The ancients who practiced the Tao</span><br/>
        <span>did not use it to enlighten the people,</span><br/>
        <span>but rather to assist them in gaining simplicity.</span><br/>
        <span>The reason people are difficult to govern</span><br/>
        <span>is because they are too clever.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Hence, a person who attempts</span><br/>
        <span>to govern a country by cleverness</span><br/>
        <span>will injure it.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who govern without cleverness</span><br/>
        <span>will be a blessing to the land.</span><br/>
        <span>These are the two models.</span><br/>
        <span>Knowing these models is called the Mystic Virtue.</span><br/>
        <span>The Mystic Virtue is deep and so far-reaching</span><br/>
        <span>that it can lead all things back</span><br/>
        <span>toward great harmony.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-66">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>How did the sea</span><br/>
        <span>gain kingship of a hundred streams?</span><br/>
        <span>Because it takes the lower position.</span><br/>
        <span>Hence, it is king of a hundred streams.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, when True Persons are over the people</span><br/>
        <span>they put themselves below the people by their speech.</span><br/>
        <span>When they lead the people</span><br/>
        <span>they stand behind the people.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When True Persons are given places above the people</span><br/>
        <span>they do not crush the people with their weight.</span><br/>
        <span>When they take their place ahead of the people</span><br/>
        <span>they do not obstruct the people’s progress.</span><br/>
        <span>That is why everything under heaven supports them gladly</span><br/>
        <span>and does not tire of them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Because they strive with no one,</span><br/>
        <span>no one can ever strive with them.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-67">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everyone under heaven says my Tao is great</span><br/>
        <span>and resembles nothing else.</span><br/>
        <span>It is because it is great that it seems different.</span><br/>
        <span>If it were like anything on earth</span><br/>
        <span>it would have been small from the beginning.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>I have three treasures that I cherish and hald fast.</span><br/>
        <span>The first is gentleness,</span><br/>
        <span>the second is simplicity,</span><br/>
        <span>the third is daring not to be first</span><br/>
        <span>among all things under heaven.</span><br/>
        <span>Because of gentleness I am able to be courageous.</span><br/>
        <span>Because of simplicity I am able to be generous.</span><br/>
        <span>Because of daring not to be first</span><br/>
        <span>I am able to lead.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>If people forsake gentleness and attempt to be courageous,</span><br/>
        <span>forsake simplicity and attempt to be generous,</span><br/>
        <span>forsake the last place and attempt to get the first place,</span><br/>
        <span>this is certain death.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Gentleness conquers in battle and protects in defense.</span><br/>
        <span>What heaven guards, it arms with the gift of gentleness.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-68">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A skilled warrior does not rush ahead of others</span><br/>
        <span>A skilled fighter does not make a show of anger.</span><br/>
        <span>A skilled victor does not seek revenge.</span><br/>
        <span>A skilled employer does not acr superior.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is known as the virtue of not competing.</span><br/>
        <span>This is known as making use of the abilities of others.</span><br/>
        <span>This is known as being united with heaven</span><br/>
        <span>as it was in ancient times.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-69">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The master soldiers have a saying:</span><br/>
        <span>I dare not be the host but prefer to be the guest.</span><br/>
        <span>I dare not advance an inch</span><br/>
        <span>but prefer to retreat a foot.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>This is called marching without Inoving,</span><br/>
        <span>rolling up a sleeve without baring an arm,</span><br/>
        <span>capturing a foe without a battlefront,</span><br/>
        <span>arming yourself without weapons.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is no disaster greater than attacking</span><br/>
        <span>and finding no enemy.</span><br/>
        <span>Doing so will cost you your treasure.</span><br/>
        <span>Thus it is that when opposing forces meet,</span><br/>
        <span>victory will go to those</span><br/>
        <span>who take no delight in the situation.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-70">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words are easy to understand</span><br/>
        <span>and easy to put into practice.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one under heaven understands them</span><br/>
        <span>or puts them into practice.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>My words have an ancestor. My actions are governed.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Because people do not understand this</span><br/>
        <span>they do not understand me.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who understand me are few.</span><br/>
        <span>Those who follow me should be respected.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person wears homespun clothes</span><br/>
        <span>and carries jade in the heart.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-71">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>lt is well to know that you do not know.</span><br/>
        <span>To think you know when you do not is sickness.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When you are sick of sickness you will no longer be sick.</span><br/>
        <span>True Persons are not sick because they are sick of sickness;</span><br/>
        <span>this is the way to health.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-72">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the people lack a sense of awe</span><br/>
        <span>disaster will descend upon them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Do not constrict their living space.</span><br/>
        <span>Do not harass them in their work.</span><br/>
        <span>If you do not oppress them, they will not weary of you.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, True Persons know themselves</span><br/>
        <span>but make no show of themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>They know their value</span><br/>
        <span>but do not exalt themselves.</span><br/>
        <span>They prefer this within to that without.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-73">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>A person whose courage lies in daring will meet death.</span><br/>
        <span>A person whose courage lies in not daring</span><br/>
        <span>will encounter life.</span><br/>
        <span>Of the two courses, either may be beneficial or harmful.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Heaven dislikes what it dislikes.</span><br/>
        <span>Who knows the reason why?</span><br/>
        <span>Even the True Person has difficulty with such a question.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The Tao of Heaven</span><br/>
        <span>does not strive and yet it overcomes,</span><br/>
        <span>does not speak and yet it gets responses,</span><br/>
        <span>does not beckon and yet it attracts,</span><br/>
        <span>is at ease and yet it follows a plan.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The net of heaven is cast wide.</span><br/>
        <span>Though the mesh is coarse, nothing ever slips through.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-74">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>When the people do not fear death,</span><br/>
        <span>of what use is it to threaten them with death?</span><br/>
        <span>If the people were always afraid of death</span><br/>
        <span>and if those who did wrong</span><br/>
        <span>would always be arrested and put to death,</span><br/>
        <span>who would do wrong?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>There is always a Lord of Execution</span><br/>
        <span>whose duty it is to kill.</span><br/>
        <span>If you try to fill that function</span><br/>
        <span>it is like trying to hew wood</span><br/>
        <span>in place of a master carpenter. You will probably injure your own hands.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-75">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Why are the people starving?</span><br/>
        <span>Because their leaders eat up too much of the tax-grain;</span><br/>
        <span>that is why the people are starving.</span><br/>
        <span>Why are thc people difficult to govern?</span><br/>
        <span>Because their leaders interfere;</span><br/>
        <span>that is why the people are difficult to govern.</span><br/>
        <span>Why do the people treat death lightly.</span><br/>
        <span>Because their leaders are so grossly absorbed</span><br/>
        <span>in the pursuit of living;</span><br/>
        <span>that is why the people treat death lightly.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Indeed, it is wiser to ignore life altogether</span><br/>
        <span>than to place too high a value on it.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-76">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>At birth you are supple and soft.</span><br/>
        <span>At death you are stiff and hard.</span><br/>
        <span>Grass and trees are pliant and tender when living,</span><br/>
        <span>but they are dry and brittle when dead.</span><br/>
        <span>Therefore, the stiff and hard are attendants of death,</span><br/>
        <span>the supple and soft are attendants of life.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Thus, the hard weapon will be broken.</span><br/>
        <span>The mighty tree will invite the axe.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the hard and mighty belong below;</span><br/>
        <span>the yielding and gentle belong above.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-77">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way of heaven is like the bending of a bow.</span><br/>
        <span>The high end is pulled down and the low end is raised up.</span><br/>
        <span>The excessive is dirninished</span><br/>
        <span>and the deficient is supplemented.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>It is the way of heaven to take where there is too much</span><br/>
        <span>in order to give where there is not enough.</span><br/>
        <span>The way of people is otherwise.</span><br/>
        <span>They take where there is not enough</span><br/>
        <span>in order to increase where there is already too much.</span><br/>
        <span>Who will take from their own excesses</span><br/>
        <span>and give to all under heaven?</span><br/>
        <span>Only those who hold to the Tao.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person benefits yet expects no reward,</span><br/>
        <span>does the work and moves on.</span><br/>
        <span>There is no desire to be considered better than others.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-78">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Nothing under heaven is</span><br/>
        <span>softer or more yielding than water.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet it has no equal for attacking things</span><br/>
        <span>that are hard and stiff.</span><br/>
        <span>Nothing can withstand it.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Everyone knows that the yielding overcomes the stiff,</span><br/>
        <span>and the soft overcomes the hard.</span><br/>
        <span>Yet no one applies this knowledge.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, an Old One said:</span><br/>
        <span>Only a person who has accept,ed the country’s dirt</span><br/>
        <span>is a leader worthy to offer sacrifice</span><br/>
        <span>at its shrines of earth and grain.</span><br/>
        <span>Only a person who takes llp the country’s burdens</span><br/>
        <span>deserves to be a leader</span><br/>
        <span>among those who dwell under heaven.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Straightforward words seem crooked.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-79">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Even though a truce is made between great enemies,</span><br/>
        <span>some enmity is bound to remain.</span><br/>
        <span>How can this be beneficial?</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Therefore, the True Person</span><br/>
        <span>undertakes the obligations of the agreerment</span><br/>
        <span>but makes no claim upon others.</span><br/>
        <span>The person who has Virtue shares with others.</span><br/>
        <span>The person who lacks Virtue takes fron others.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way of heaven has no favorites;</span><br/>
        <span>it always remains with what is good.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-80">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>In a small country with few people:</span><br/>
        <span>Though there are machines that would increase</span><br/>
        <span>production ten to a hundred miles</span><br/>
        <span>they are not used.</span><br/>
        <span>The people take death seriously and do not</span><br/>
        <span>travel about.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Though they have boats and carriages no one uses them.</span><br/>
        <span>Though they have armor and weapons,</span><br/>
        <span>there is no occasion to display them.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The people give up writing</span><br/>
        <span>and return to the knotting of cords.</span><br/>
        <span>They are satisfied with their food.</span><br/>
        <span>They are pleased with their clothes.</span><br/>
        <span>They are content with their homes.</span><br/>
        <span>They are happy in their simple ways.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Even though they live within sight of another country</span><br/>
        <span>and can hear dogs barking and cocks crowing in it,</span><br/>
        <span>still the people grow old and die</span><br/>
        <span>without ever coming into conflict.</span>
    </p>
</section>

<section epub:type="chapter" id="ch-81">
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>Sincere words are not elegant;</span><br/>
        <span>elegant words are not sincere.</span><br/>
        <span>The good person does not argue;</span><br/>
        <span>the person who argues is not good.</span><br/>
        <span>The wise do not have great learning;</span><br/>
        <span>those with great learning are not wise.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>True Persons do not hoard.</span><br/>
        <span>Using all they have for others, they still have more.</span><br/>
        <span>Giving all they have to others, they are richer than before.</span>
    </p>
    <p class="stanza">
        <span>The way of heaven is to benefit and not to harm.</span><br/>
        <span>The way of the True Reason is to assist without striving</span><br/>
        <span>in the unfolding of the story of the earth.</span>
    </p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
