<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>Tao Te Ching</title>
    <meta name="author" content="Lao Tzu"/>
    <meta name="translator" content="Bart Marshall"/>
    <meta name="year" content="2006"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
    <link href="../local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">

<section id="ch-01" epub:type="chapter" title="One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>That which can be perceived is not the timeless That.</span><br/>
    <span>That which can be named is not the nameless One.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The source of heaven and earth is without form or substance.</span><br/>
    <span>Naming creates the ten thousand things.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When desire is absent, the mystery is obvious.</span><br/>
    <span>When desire occurs, creation unfolds.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Mystery and creation arise from the same source.</span><br/>
    <span>The source is emptiness.</span><br/>
    <span>Void within void.</span><br/>
    <span>The realm of Tao.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-02" epub:type="chapter" title="Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Judging beauty creates ugliness.</span><br/>
    <span>Defining good creates evil.</span><br/>
    <span>All and void arise together.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Hard and soft,</span><br/>
    <span>long and short,</span><br/>
    <span>high and low,</span><br/>
    <span>sound and silence,</span><br/>
    <span>now and then.</span><br/>
    <span>Opposites exist because of each other.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the sage acts by not-doing and teaches no-thought.</span><br/>
    <span>The ten thousand things arise and vanish without him.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He works without motive,</span><br/>
    <span>indifferent to outcome.</span><br/>
    <span>Because there is no doer,</span><br/>
    <span>his actions are timeless.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-03" epub:type="chapter" title="Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Bestowing honor breeds ambitions.</span><br/>
    <span>Hoarding treasure invites thieves.</span><br/>
    <span>Displaying objects of desire sows the seeds of discontent.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the sage governs</span><br/>
    <span>by emptying minds and filling bellies,</span><br/>
    <span>by weakening wills and strengthening bones.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He extols the virtue of desireless unknowing</span><br/>
    <span>and keeps intellects off balance.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When not-doing is accomplished,</span><br/>
    <span>nothing remains undone.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-04" epub:type="chapter" title="Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao is hollow emptiness.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The substance of All,</span><br/>
    <span>it is absent of substance.</span><br/>
    <span>Dimensionless Void,</span><br/>
    <span>it is the source of the ten thousand things.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>It blunts sharpness,</span><br/>
    <span>unravels entanglements,</span><br/>
    <span>diffuses brightness,</span><br/>
    <span>merges with dust.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Dark, invisible, it only seems to be.</span><br/>
    <span>It is the child of no-thing</span><br/>
    <span>and the father of God.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-05" epub:type="chapter" title="Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth is indifferent to the myriad creatures.</span><br/>
    <span>They appear as straw dogs.</span><br/>
    <span>The sage is indifferent to the multitudes of men.</span><br/>
    <span>They appear as straw dogs.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth is like a bellows,</span><br/>
    <span>both empty and full.</span><br/>
    <span>Moving, it brings forth, endlessly.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>More words, less understanding.</span><br/>
    <span>Hold fast to the core.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-06" epub:type="chapter" title="Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The urge of creation is ceaseless.</span><br/>
    <span>It is called the Dark Mother.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The womb of the Dark Mother</span><br/>
    <span>is the ground of heaven and earth.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Timeless, imperceptible,</span><br/>
    <span>it continues ever-present.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Endless use does not touch it.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-07" epub:type="chapter" title="Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth is everlasting.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why is it everlasting?</span><br/>
    <span>Because it is not conscious of itself.</span><br/>
    <span>Having no thought of being, it never is not.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Like this, the sage forgets himself</span><br/>
    <span>so is always present.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Without self-concern,</span><br/>
    <span>the self is eternal.</span><br/>
    <span>When self-interest subsides,</span><br/>
    <span>fulfillment happens.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-08" epub:type="chapter" title="Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Supreme virtue is like water.</span><br/>
    <span>It nourishes the ten thousand things without effort</span><br/>
    <span>and flows in places men shun.</span><br/>
    <span>It is like Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Stand on solid ground.</span><br/>
    <span>Go deep into the heart.</span><br/>
    <span>Speak only what is true.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>In friendship, be kind.</span><br/>
    <span>In governing, be just.</span><br/>
    <span>In enterprise, be able.</span><br/>
    <span>In action, watch the timing.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Do not contend with nature and nothing will go wrong.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-09" epub:type="chapter" title="Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>An over-filled cup is difficult to carry.</span><br/>
    <span>An over-sharp point is easily broken.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Fill your house with gold and jade</span><br/>
    <span>and it cannot be protected.</span><br/>
    <span>Become puffed with pride</span><br/>
    <span>and disaster will follow.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Do only what needs doing then forget it.</span><br/>
    <span>This is the way of heaven.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-10" epub:type="chapter" title="Ten">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>While maintaining a body</span><br/>
    <span>can you become One?</span><br/>
    <span>While breathing the force of life</span><br/>
    <span>can you be innocent as a babe?</span><br/>
    <span>While polishing the dark mirror</span><br/>
    <span>can you be without dust?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>While loving and ruling the people</span><br/>
    <span>can you refrain from action?</span><br/>
    <span>While coming and going from heaven</span><br/>
    <span>can you be passive as a woman?</span><br/>
    <span>Understanding all things</span><br/>
    <span>can you abide in unknowing?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Give birth and nurture.</span><br/>
    <span>Create without claim.</span><br/>
    <span>Lead without taking command.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is supreme virtue.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-11" epub:type="chapter" title="Eleven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Thirty spokes of the wheel converge</span><br/>
    <span>to define a hole.</span><br/>
    <span>Clay is molded into pots</span><br/>
    <span>to shape emptiness.</span><br/>
    <span>Walls are hammered into rooms</span><br/>
    <span>to enclosed space.</span><br/>
    <span>Windows are cut into walls</span><br/>
    <span>to frame absence.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Though things may have value,</span><br/>
    <span>without no-thing they are useless.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-12" epub:type="chapter" title="Twelve">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The five colors confuse the eye.</span><br/>
    <span>The five tones deaden the ear.</span><br/>
    <span>The five flavors dull the palette.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Racing and hunting madden the mind.</span><br/>
    <span>Valuable goods hinder movement.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the sage is guided by his gut, not his senses.</span><br/>
    <span>He attends to one and ignores the other.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-13" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Receive honor with dismay.</span><br/>
    <span>Accept misfortune gratefully.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why receive honor with dismay?</span><br/>
    <span>Honor and dishonor cause the same disturbance.</span><br/>
    <span>With honor comes the fear of disgrace.</span><br/>
    <span>With disgrace comes anxiety and dread.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why accept misfortune gratefully?</span><br/>
    <span>Misfortune weakens the bond to body and self.</span><br/>
    <span>Without a separate self, what misfortune is possible?</span><br/>
    <span>See misfortune as a condition of separation,</span><br/>
    <span>and you will become whole.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>See the world as your body, and all will be delivered unto you.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-14" epub:type="chapter" title="Fourteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Searching, we cannot see it.</span><br/>
    <span>We call it ephemeral.</span><br/>
    <span>Straining, we cannot hear it.</span><br/>
    <span>We call it ethereal.</span><br/>
    <span>Reaching, we cannot grasp it.</span><br/>
    <span>We call it intangible.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>These three are often confused</span><br/>
    <span>because they are the same.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The One is not bright above and dark below.</span><br/>
    <span>Transparent, it moves in and out of nothing.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Its form has no shape.</span><br/>
    <span>Its image has no substance.</span><br/>
    <span>It is indistinct, elusive.</span><br/>
    <span>Nothing to face, nothing to follow.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Hold to the timeless Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>Abide in the present.</span><br/>
    <span>Now is the ancient beginning.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-15" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The old masters were deep, unfathomable,</span><br/>
    <span>profound beyond understanding.</span><br/>
    <span>Because they were unfathomable</span><br/>
    <span>we can only describe their demeanor.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Cautious, as if crossing an icy stream.</span><br/>
    <span>Alert, as if sensing danger.</span><br/>
    <span>Respectful, like visiting guests.</span><br/>
    <span>Yielding, like melting ice.</span><br/>
    <span>Simple, like uncarved wood.</span><br/>
    <span>Open, like beckoning valleys.</span><br/>
    <span>Mysterious, like opaque pools.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Still the mind and the mud settles.</span><br/>
    <span>Do nothing and action comes of itself.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>One who embraces Tao has no desire for fulfillment.</span><br/>
    <span>Not desiring fulfillment, he is finished with birth and death.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-16" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Be completely empty.</span><br/>
    <span>Be completely still.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Witness the ten thousand things</span><br/>
    <span>appear and vanish in one motion.</span><br/>
    <span>Watch as they arise, linger,</span><br/>
    <span>and return to the source—stillness.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is the way it is.</span><br/>
    <span>It is called everlasting life.</span><br/>
    <span>To witness the everlasting is to be awake.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Not seeing the everlasting, one engages in blind action.</span><br/>
    <span>Blind action leads to misfortune.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Seeing the everlasting, one encompasses all.</span><br/>
    <span>Encompassing all, one is impartial.</span><br/>
    <span>Being impartial, one acts nobly.</span><br/>
    <span>Acting nobly, one enters heaven.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Entering heaven is to be one with Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>Being one with Tao is to be everlasting.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Though the body dies, nothing is disturbed.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-17" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventeen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When a sage governs, people barely notice.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Lesser rulers are praised and loved.</span><br/>
    <span>Lesser still are feared and obeyed.</span><br/>
    <span>The least are ridiculed and despised.</span><br/>
    <span>Trust is earned by trusting.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage uses words sparingly.</span><br/>
    <span>His work is done without fanfare.</span><br/>
    <span>People say: “It happened by itself.”</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-18" epub:type="chapter" title="Eighteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When Tao is forgotten,</span><br/>
    <span>charity and righteousness are born.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When intelligence and knowledge are valued,</span><br/>
    <span>duplicity and pretense soon follow.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When the family is discordant,</span><br/>
    <span>love and duty are preached.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When the country is in chaos,</span><br/>
    <span>loyal patriots appear.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-19" epub:type="chapter" title="Nineteen">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Abandon holiness, renounce wisdom.</span><br/>
    <span>It will be a hundred times better for everyone.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Eliminate morality and benevolence.</span><br/>
    <span>Love and empathy will naturally return.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Give up cleverness and profit.</span><br/>
    <span>Thieves and bandits will disappear.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>But those are outward lessons, not the core.</span><br/>
    <span>Be simple.</span><br/>
    <span>Be true.</span><br/>
    <span>Cast off selfhood and desire.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-20" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Between yes and no, is there really much difference?</span><br/>
    <span>Good and bad, are they so far apart?</span><br/>
    <span>Must I think as others think?</span><br/>
    <span>Alas, there would be no end to fear.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The multitudes are busy with feasts and celebrations.</span><br/>
    <span>In spring they climb towers and enjoy the view.</span><br/>
    <span>I alone am unmoved, like an infant too young to smile.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Others have more than enough.</span><br/>
    <span>I alone have nothing.</span><br/>
    <span>My mind is that of a fool—empty.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Others are clear and bright.</span><br/>
    <span>I alone am nebulous and dim.</span><br/>
    <span>Others are alert and clever.</span><br/>
    <span>I alone am withdrawn,</span><br/>
    <span>adrift in the ocean,</span><br/>
    <span>directionless as swirling wind.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Everyone else has purpose.</span><br/>
    <span>I alone am stubborn and untamed.</span><br/>
    <span>I am different.</span><br/>
    <span>I am nourished by the Dark Mother.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-21" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Supreme virtue is to abide in Tao alone.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao is elusive and empty—</span><br/>
    <span>oh yes, utterly empty and elusive—</span><br/>
    <span>yet within it dreamlike images arise.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Oh yes, it is indistinct and nebulous,</span><br/>
    <span>but within it shadows take form.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Oh yes, it is mysterious and dark,</span><br/>
    <span>but within it appearances originate.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The origin of creation is the real.</span><br/>
    <span>Its manifestations are unceasing.</span><br/>
    <span>This can be witnessed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>How do I witness the origin of creation?</span><br/>
    <span>By looking!</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-22" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Surrender and become whole.</span><br/>
    <span>Bend low and be straightened.</span><br/>
    <span>Become empty and be filled.</span><br/>
    <span>Burn out and be renewed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Having nothing, beauty is revealed.</span><br/>
    <span>Having much, the way is hidden.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage abides in One</span><br/>
    <span>and thus is master of heaven and earth.</span><br/>
    <span>Not being self-absorbed, his vision is clear.</span><br/>
    <span>Not asserting himself, his light shines forth.</span><br/>
    <span>Not showing off, his merit is obvious.</span><br/>
    <span>Not praising himself, praise is showered upon him.</span><br/>
    <span>Not contending, nothing under heaven stands in his way.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This ancient saying, “Surrender and become whole,”</span><br/>
    <span>is it empty words?</span><br/>
    <span>Being whole means all things have returned to you.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-23" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>To speak a short time is the way of nature.</span><br/>
    <span>High winds blow out before morning.</span><br/>
    <span>Hard rain subsides in a day.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>What issues these?</span><br/>
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth.</span><br/>
    <span>If the realm of heaven and earth cannot maintain duration,</span><br/>
    <span>what chance has man?</span><br/>
    <span>This is why one embraces Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He who aligns with Tao becomes one with Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>He who aligns with virtue attains supreme virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>He who fails to align with Tao is lost.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He who aligns with Tao is received by Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>He who aligns with virtue finds only virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>He who has become lost is close to home.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Faith comes to the faithful.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-24" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>He who stands on tiptoe is unsteady.</span><br/>
    <span>He who strides too hard cannot go far.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He who shines a light on himself is not enlightened.</span><br/>
    <span>He who asserts himself is not distinguished.</span><br/>
    <span>He who praises himself has no merit.</span><br/>
    <span>He who brags of his success will not last long.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Observers of Tao see these as spoiled food and pointless action—</span><br/>
    <span>shunned even by the myriad creatures.</span><br/>
    <span>One who knows Tao does not abide them.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-25" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Formless no-thing.</span><br/>
    <span>Precedent of heaven and earth.</span><br/>
    <span>Timeless, unchanging, solitary, silent.</span><br/>
    <span>It is the mother of the ten thousand things.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>I do not know its name.</span><br/>
    <span>I call it Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>If forced to describe it,</span><br/>
    <span>I call it great.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Great implies vast reaches.</span><br/>
    <span>Vast reaches implies far away.</span><br/>
    <span>Far away implies return.</span><br/>
    <span>Tao is great.</span><br/>
    <span>Heaven is great.</span><br/>
    <span>Earth is great.</span><br/>
    <span>Man, too, is great.</span><br/>
    <span>In the realm there are four greats,</span><br/>
    <span>and a noble man is one.</span><br/>
    <span>Man follows the way of earth.</span><br/>
    <span>Earth follows the way of heaven.</span><br/>
    <span>Heaven follows the way of Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>Tao is the great Way.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-26" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Gravity is the ground of lightness.</span><br/>
    <span>Stillness is the master of unrest.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage can travel all day,</span><br/>
    <span>yet never wander far from the baggage wagon.</span><br/>
    <span>Though splendor and spectacle may beckon,</span><br/>
    <span>he remains unmoved, indifferent.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly?</span><br/>
    <span>One who acts lightly is not grounded.</span><br/>
    <span>One who is restless is not his own master.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-27" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A good walker leaves no tracks.</span><br/>
    <span>A good speaker does not slip up.</span><br/>
    <span>A good accountant needs no counter.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>A good doorsmith uses no bolts or locks</span><br/>
    <span>yet none can open what he closes.</span><br/>
    <span>A good binder uses no knots</span><br/>
    <span>yet what he binds cannot be unraveled.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage is good at saving souls and rejects no one.</span><br/>
    <span>He takes care of all things and abandons nothing.</span><br/>
    <span>This is called “the way of awareness.”</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The good man is the ignorant man’s teacher.</span><br/>
    <span>The ignorant man is the good man’s lesson.</span><br/>
    <span>To not honor the teacher and value the lesson—</span><br/>
    <span>no matter how much wisdom one acquires—</span><br/>
    <span>is to miss the mark.</span><br/>
    <span>This is an essential secret.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-28" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Know the strength of the male, but keep to the role of the female.</span><br/>
    <span>Be the river of the world.</span><br/>
    <span>Being the river of the world, supreme virtue flows without end.</span><br/>
    <span>Flowing without end, you are the timeless infant.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Know the purity of light but maintain darkness.</span><br/>
    <span>Be the model of the world.</span><br/>
    <span>Being the model of the world, supreme virtue is constant.</span><br/>
    <span>Maintaining constant virtue, you are the boundless realm.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Be worthy of high honors, but keep to the role of the lowly.</span><br/>
    <span>Be the valley of the world.</span><br/>
    <span>Being the valley of the world, supreme virtue is fulfilled.</span><br/>
    <span>Being fulfilled, you are the uncarved block.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The uncarved block appears as separate things.</span><br/>
    <span>The sage sees things as they are and rules the world.</span><br/>
    <span>Great power does not divide.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-29" epub:type="chapter" title="Twenty Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>There are those who want to control the realm</span><br/>
    <span>and make it more to their liking.</span><br/>
    <span>They will never succeed.</span><br/>
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth is perfect, a sacred vessel.</span><br/>
    <span>It cannot be improved.</span><br/>
    <span>He who tries to change it, destroys it for himself.</span><br/>
    <span>He who tries to hold it, loses all contact.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>It is natural for beings to sometimes lead, sometimes follow,</span><br/>
    <span>sometimes breathe hot, sometimes blow cold,</span><br/>
    <span>sometimes expand, sometimes decay,</span><br/>
    <span>sometimes overcome, sometimes collapse.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage therefore abandons pleasure, judgment and pride.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-30" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When counseling rulers, observers of Tao do not advise force.</span><br/>
    <span>This is certain to bring consequences.</span><br/>
    <span>Where great armies have passed, thorn bushes thrive.</span><br/>
    <span>Famine follows in the wake of war.</span><br/>
    <span>A good ruler does only what is necessary to achieve results.</span><br/>
    <span>He does not abuse position.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Achieve results, but do not glory in them.</span><br/>
    <span>Achieve results, but do not boast.</span><br/>
    <span>Achieve results, but be not proud.</span><br/>
    <span>Achieve results because there is no choice.</span><br/>
    <span>Achieve results but do not overpower.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Doing more than necessary brings exhaustion.</span><br/>
    <span>This is not in harmony with Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>What is not in harmony with Tao soon perishes.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-31" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Even the finest weapons are instruments of ill omen,</span><br/>
    <span>hated and feared by all creatures.</span><br/>
    <span>Observers of Tao have no use for them.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>At home, a man of virtue gives precedence to the left.</span><br/>
    <span>At war, he gives precedence to the right.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Weapons are not the tools of a man of virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>Weapons are instruments of ill omen,</span><br/>
    <span>to be employed as a last resort.</span><br/>
    <span>Do not relish their use</span><br/>
    <span>or admire their excellence.</span><br/>
    <span>To see weapons as excellent is to relish killing.</span><br/>
    <span>If you relish killing you will never find the way.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>On joyful occasions, precedence is given to the left.</span><br/>
    <span>On sad occasions, precedence is given to the right.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When an army is arrayed, the lieutenant is placed on the left.</span><br/>
    <span>The commander is placed on the right.</span><br/>
    <span>Thus, war is conducted as a funeral rite.</span><br/>
    <span>When multitudes are being killed,</span><br/>
    <span>hold in your heart only sorrow.</span><br/>
    <span>When victory is achieved,</span><br/>
    <span>mark it with mourning.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-32" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao is the uncarved block.</span><br/>
    <span>Timeless, undefined, infinitesimally subtle.</span><br/>
    <span>None is its master.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>If lords and princes observed it,</span><br/>
    <span>the ten thousand things would arrive as guests to the table.</span><br/>
    <span>Heaven and earth would rejoice</span><br/>
    <span>and sweet nectar would fall,</span><br/>
    <span>though none under heaven had decreed it.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When the whole is divided the parts are named.</span><br/>
    <span>There are already too many names.</span><br/>
    <span>It is time to stop.</span><br/>
    <span>Knowing when to stop avoids exhaustion.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao in the world is like</span><br/>
    <span>stream flowing to river flowing to sea.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-33" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>One who knows others is wise.</span><br/>
    <span>One who knows self is enlightened.</span><br/>
    <span>One who masters others is strong.</span><br/>
    <span>One who masters self is powerful.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Knowing you have enough is fulfillment.</span><br/>
    <span>Exerting strong effort brings exhaustion.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He who abides where he is lasts long.</span><br/>
    <span>He who dies without ceasing is timelessly present.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-34" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Great Tao flows everywhere,</span><br/>
    <span>left and right, all directions.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The ten thousand things depend on it</span><br/>
    <span>and it does not turn away.</span><br/>
    <span>Its purpose is fulfilled but it lays no claim.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>It clothes and nourishes the ten thousand things</span><br/>
    <span>but is not their lord.</span><br/>
    <span>It desires nothing.</span><br/>
    <span>It is smaller than small.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The ten thousand things return to it</span><br/>
    <span>but it is not their master.</span><br/>
    <span>It is indeed great.</span><br/>
    <span>Because it knows nothing of greatness,</span><br/>
    <span>it is greater than great.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-35" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Extol the great illusion</span><br/>
    <span>and the men of the world will gather.</span><br/>
    <span>Talk of success, security and happiness</span><br/>
    <span>and the multitudes will flock.</span><br/>
    <span>Offer music and tasty food and travelers will stop in.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Talk of Tao has no flavor.</span><br/>
    <span>Look for it—there is nothing to see.</span><br/>
    <span>Listen for it—there is nothing to hear.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Merge with it—there is no boundary or end.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-36" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>If you want it to contract, let it expand.</span><br/>
    <span>If you want it to weaken, let it gain strength.</span><br/>
    <span>To bring a thing down, let it be raised high.</span><br/>
    <span>To bring a thing to you, let go.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is called “perceiving the subtle workings.”</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.</span><br/>
    <span>A fish should not leave deep water.</span><br/>
    <span>A country should not show off its power.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-37" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao does nothing yet nothing remains undone.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When a noble man observes this</span><br/>
    <span>the ten thousand things are transformed.</span><br/>
    <span>When the desire to act re-emerges,</span><br/>
    <span>it is stilled by the nameless no-thing.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Without things there is no desire.</span><br/>
    <span>Without desire there is stillness.</span><br/>
    <span>In stillness, the realm of heaven and earth is perfect.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-38" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The man of high virtue is not aware of himself</span><br/>
    <span>and thus attains supreme virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>The man of low virtue self-consciously strives</span><br/>
    <span>and thus is without virtue.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The wise man does nothing</span><br/>
    <span>yet leaves nothing undone.</span><br/>
    <span>The ignorant man is consumed by doing</span><br/>
    <span>yet little is accomplished.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The compassionate man acts without motive.</span><br/>
    <span>The righteous man acts to gain merit.</span><br/>
    <span>The moral man acts to impose order.</span><br/>
    <span>If no one responds,</span><br/>
    <span>he bares his arms and becomes an enforcer.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>When Tao is lost there is virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>When virtue is lost there is goodness.</span><br/>
    <span>When goodness is lost there is morality.</span><br/>
    <span>When morality is lost, rules of conduct are imposed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Rules are the remnants of trust and faith,</span><br/>
    <span>and the beginning of chaos.</span><br/>
    <span>Knowledge is an ornamental blossom of Tao</span><br/>
    <span>and the beginning of misunderstanding.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage dwells in the depths, not the surface,</span><br/>
    <span>in the root not the flower.</span><br/>
    <span>He abides in one and lets go of the other.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-39" epub:type="chapter" title="Thirty Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Before time, these ancestors arise from One:</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Heaven arises from One and becomes clear.</span><br/>
    <span>Earth arises from One and becomes firm.</span><br/>
    <span>Spirit arises from One and becomes divine.</span><br/>
    <span>Emptiness arises from One and becomes creation.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The ten thousand things arise from One</span><br/>
    <span>and become manifest.</span><br/>
    <span>Kings and princes arise from One</span><br/>
    <span>and become exalted.</span><br/>
    <span>One is the source of All.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Separated from the Source:</span><br/>
    <span>the clearness of heaven would vanish,</span><br/>
    <span>the firmament of earth would dissolve,</span><br/>
    <span>the divinity of spirit would dissipate,</span><br/>
    <span>creation would become desolation.</span><br/>
    <span>The ten thousand things would perish,</span><br/>
    <span>and kingdoms would disappear.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Humility is the root of honor.</span><br/>
    <span>Lowliness is the foundation of esteem.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, a noble man considers himself</span><br/>
    <span>orphaned, bereft, unworthy.</span><br/>
    <span>This is knowing the humble source—is it not?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>To seek praise is not praiseworthy.</span><br/>
    <span>Do not jangle like jewelry.</span><br/>
    <span>Be still as stone.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-40" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao moves by returning and acts by yielding.</span><br/>
    <span>Thus, the ten thousand things arise into being.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Being arises from non-being.</span><br/>
    <span>Things arise from no-thing.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-41" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When the wise student hears of Tao</span><br/>
    <span>he practices diligently.</span><br/>
    <span>When the average student hears of Tao</span><br/>
    <span>he practices off and on.</span><br/>
    <span>When the foolish student hears of Tao</span><br/>
    <span>he laughs out loud.</span><br/>
    <span>If the foolish do not laugh, it is not Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus it is said:</span><br/>
    <span>The path of light is through darkness.</span><br/>
    <span>The road ahead leads back.</span><br/>
    <span>The easy way is most difficult.</span><br/>
    <span>The highest fulfillment is emptiness.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>True purity seems sullied.</span><br/>
    <span>True abundance seems bereft.</span><br/>
    <span>True power seems weak.</span><br/>
    <span>True substance seems hollow.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The greatest region has no boundaries.</span><br/>
    <span>The best tools are fashioned slowly.</span><br/>
    <span>The highest sounds are hard to hear.</span><br/>
    <span>The perfect form has no shape.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao is unseen, undefined.</span><br/>
    <span>Yet Tao alone nourishes</span><br/>
    <span>and brings all things to fulfillment.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-42" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>From Tao, One arises.</span><br/>
    <span>From One, two.</span><br/>
    <span>From two, three.</span><br/>
    <span>Three becomes the ten thousand things.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The ten thousand things carry yin on their backs</span><br/>
    <span>and hold yang in their arms.</span><br/>
    <span>Existence depends on the two.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Men hate to be orphaned, bereft, unworthy,</span><br/>
    <span>yet this is how the noble man describes himself.</span><br/>
    <span>Loss is gain, gain is loss.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>I teach what has always been taught:</span><br/>
    <span>“A fervent man is surprised by death.”</span><br/>
    <span>I see this as the foundation of my teaching.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-43" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Under heaven, the soft and yielding</span><br/>
    <span>overcomes the hard and strong.</span><br/>
    <span>That without substance permeates the impenetrable.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, I embrace non-action.</span><br/>
    <span>Teach without words.</span><br/>
    <span>Work without doing.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Few under heaven understand this.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-44" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Name or person, which is more dear?</span><br/>
    <span>Person or possessions, which is more precious?</span><br/>
    <span>Gain or loss, which is more harmful?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Excessive desire incurs great expense.</span><br/>
    <span>One who hoards treasure suffers loss.</span><br/>
    <span>One who knows enough is enough</span><br/>
    <span>will always have enough.</span><br/>
    <span>One who knows when to stop avoids exhaustion.</span><br/>
    <span>Thus, he will endure.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-45" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Perfection appears imperfect but has no flaw.</span><br/>
    <span>Fulfillment appears as emptiness but has no limit.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Great truth is a paradox.</span><br/>
    <span>Great wisdom is self-evident.</span><br/>
    <span>Great eloquence is unpracticed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Movement overcomes cold.</span><br/>
    <span>Stillness overcomes heat.</span><br/>
    <span>Stillness and simplicity put all things right under heaven.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-46" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When Tao is embraced in the realm,</span><br/>
    <span>race horses haul their own manure.</span><br/>
    <span>When Tao is unknown in the realm,</span><br/>
    <span>war horses are bred at the borders.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>There is no greater curse than desire,</span><br/>
    <span>no greater misfortune than greed.</span><br/>
    <span>He who knows enough is enough</span><br/>
    <span>will always have enough.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-47" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Without leaving home one can know the whole world.</span><br/>
    <span>Without looking outside one can see heaven.</span><br/>
    <span>Looking afar does not find what is near.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, the sage knows without learning,</span><br/>
    <span>sees without seeking,</span><br/>
    <span>acts without doing.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-48" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>For students of knowledge,</span><br/>
    <span>every day something is acquired.</span><br/>
    <span>For observers of Tao,</span><br/>
    <span>every day something falls away.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Less and less is done</span><br/>
    <span>until not-doing is achieved.</span><br/>
    <span>When there is no doer,</span><br/>
    <span>nothing remains to be done.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The realm of heaven and earth</span><br/>
    <span>is ruled by timeless principles.</span><br/>
    <span>He who tries to interfere is not ready to receive it.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-49" epub:type="chapter" title="Forty Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage has no heart or mind of his own.</span><br/>
    <span>Thus, he knows the heart and mind of all.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>I am good to the good</span><br/>
    <span>and good to the not-so-good.</span><br/>
    <span>This is the goodness of Virtue.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>I trust the trustworthy</span><br/>
    <span>and have faith in those who should not be trusted.</span><br/>
    <span>This is the faith of Virtue.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage is in harmony</span><br/>
    <span>with the realm of heaven and earth.</span><br/>
    <span>His mind is merged with the world.</span><br/>
    <span>People turn to him and listen.</span><br/>
    <span>He treats them as his children.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-50" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>In the passage from womb to grave</span><br/>
    <span>one in three are disciples of living.</span><br/>
    <span>One in three are disciples of death.</span><br/>
    <span>One in three are just passing through.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>All believe they have life.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He who knows the truth of existence</span><br/>
    <span>does not fear wild bulls or tigers.</span><br/>
    <span>He wears no armor in battle.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Bulls have no place to thrust their horns.</span><br/>
    <span>Tigers have no place to sink their claws.</span><br/>
    <span>Weapons have no place to enter.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why is this?</span><br/>
    <span>Because death is for the living.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-51" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao gives them life.</span><br/>
    <span>Virtue gives them nourishment.</span><br/>
    <span>The manifest world gives them form.</span><br/>
    <span>The tendencies of each make them what they are.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the ten thousand things honor Tao and esteem Virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>This honor and esteem are not commanded.</span><br/>
    <span>It is just the nature of things.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>And so, all things arise from Tao.</span><br/>
    <span>By Virtue they are nourished, developed, clothed,</span><br/>
    <span>sheltered, soothed, aged and buried.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>To create without possessing,</span><br/>
    <span>to act without making claims,</span><br/>
    <span>to lead without taking command—</span><br/>
    <span>this is timeless Virtue.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-52" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Where the realm of heaven and earth begins</span><br/>
    <span>could be called the mother of creation.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Knowing the mother, become the child.</span><br/>
    <span>Being the child, stay close to the mother.</span><br/>
    <span>Death will not bother you.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Stay quiet, keep inside,</span><br/>
    <span>and you will never want for anything.</span><br/>
    <span>Open your mouth, meddle in affairs,</span><br/>
    <span>and you are beyond rescue.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Perceiving the subtle is insight.</span><br/>
    <span>To yield requires strength.</span><br/>
    <span>Use the light of creation to become illuminated</span><br/>
    <span>and thus be saved.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is called “entering the Absolute.”</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-53" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>If I have the least bit of knowledge</span><br/>
    <span>I will follow the great Way alone</span><br/>
    <span>and fear nothing but being sidetracked.</span><br/>
    <span>The great Way is simple</span><br/>
    <span>but people delight in complexity.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The government is corrupt.</span><br/>
    <span>The fields are overgrown.</span><br/>
    <span>The granaries are empty.</span><br/>
    <span>Yet some wear fine clothes,</span><br/>
    <span>carry sharp swords,</span><br/>
    <span>gorge on food and drink,</span><br/>
    <span>and are surrounded by luxury.</span><br/>
    <span>They are thieves.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is certainly not the great Way.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-54" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>What is deeply rooted will not topple.</span><br/>
    <span>What is firmly grasped will not slip away.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>It will be honored through generations of ancestors.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Cultivated in the self, Virtue is manifest.</span><br/>
    <span>Cultivated in the family, Virtue grows.</span><br/>
    <span>Cultivated in the village, Virtue flourishes.</span><br/>
    <span>Cultivated in the nation, Virtue abounds.</span><br/>
    <span>Cultivated in the universe, Virtue is everything.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>As the self, observe the self.</span><br/>
    <span>As the family, observe the family.</span><br/>
    <span>As the village, observe the village.</span><br/>
    <span>As the nation, observe the nation.</span><br/>
    <span>As the universe, observe the universe.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>How do I know the universe?</span><br/>
    <span>Like this.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-55" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A man of Virtue can be compared to a newborn child.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Snakes and scorpions do not strike him.</span><br/>
    <span>Fierce beasts do not prey upon him.</span><br/>
    <span>Birds of prey do not attack him.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Though his bones are soft and his muscles weak,</span><br/>
    <span>his grip is firm.</span><br/>
    <span>Without knowing the union of man and woman,</span><br/>
    <span>his organ stands erect.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>His vital force is strong.</span><br/>
    <span>He can scream all day without becoming hoarse.</span><br/>
    <span>His harmony is perfect.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>To know harmony is to know the everlasting.</span><br/>
    <span>To know the everlasting is enlightenment.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>To interfere with life is ill-fated.</span><br/>
    <span>To control the breath causes strain.</span><br/>
    <span>If you exert yourself you will become exhausted.</span><br/>
    <span>This is not in harmony with Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>What is not in harmony with Tao does not long endure.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-56" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>One who knows does not talk about it.</span><br/>
    <span>One who talks about it does not know.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Stay quiet.</span><br/>
    <span>Keep inside.</span><br/>
    <span>Blunt sharpness.</span><br/>
    <span>Unravel entanglements.</span><br/>
    <span>Diffuse brightness.</span><br/>
    <span>Merge with dust.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is called “discovering original nature.”</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>One who knows original nature is</span><br/>
    <span>indifferent to intimacy and estrangement,</span><br/>
    <span>unconcerned with benefit and harm,</span><br/>
    <span>immune to honor and disgrace.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>He is embraced by heaven.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-57" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Rule the country with sincerity.</span><br/>
    <span>Wage war with cunning.</span><br/>
    <span>Master the universe with indifference.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>How do I know this is the way it is?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Because of this:</span><br/>
    <span>The more taboos, the poorer the people’s spirit.</span><br/>
    <span>The sharper men’s weapons, the more trouble in the land.</span><br/>
    <span>The greater the ingenuity, the more clutter in the world.</span><br/>
    <span>The more abundant the laws, the more abundant the thieves.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the sage says:</span><br/>
    <span>I take no action and the people naturally reform.</span><br/>
    <span>I remain at peace and the people become content.</span><br/>
    <span>I do not meddle and the people become prosperous.</span><br/>
    <span>I desire nothing and the people return to original nature.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-58" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When government does not interfere, the people are genuine.</span><br/>
    <span>When government intrudes, the people are cunning.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Happiness is founded on misery.</span><br/>
    <span>Misery lurks within happiness.</span><br/>
    <span>Is there an end to it?</span><br/>
    <span>Nothing stays the same.</span><br/>
    <span>Honesty moves with deceit.</span><br/>
    <span>Good flows with evil.</span><br/>
    <span>But people’s delusion persists.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, the sage is sharp but not divisive,</span><br/>
    <span>straightforward but not hurtful,</span><br/>
    <span>principled but not severe,</span><br/>
    <span>illumined but not blinding.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-59" epub:type="chapter" title="Fifty Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>In leading people and serving heaven,</span><br/>
    <span>nothing surpasses humility.</span><br/>
    <span>Humility is having no preferences.</span><br/>
    <span>Humility accumulates virtue.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Where virtue accumulates, nothing is impossible.</span><br/>
    <span>When nothing is impossible, there are no limits.</span><br/>
    <span>A man without limits is fit to rule the realm.</span><br/>
    <span>The mother of the realm is everlasting.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is called being deeply rooted.</span><br/>
    <span>Timeless awareness of Tao.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-60" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Governing a country is like cooking a delicate fish.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Rule in observance of Tao</span><br/>
    <span>and the forces of adversity become harmless.</span><br/>
    <span>They do not lose their power,</span><br/>
    <span>only their power to harm.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage, too, does no harm</span><br/>
    <span>and so he is not harmed.</span><br/>
    <span>Virtue flows unimpeded.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-61" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A country becomes great by lying low,</span><br/>
    <span>like the delta of a great river.</span><br/>
    <span>The confluence of the realm.</span><br/>
    <span>The mother of the world.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The female conquers the male by stillness.</span><br/>
    <span>Being still, she takes the lower position.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>A great country conquers a small country</span><br/>
    <span>by taking the lower position.</span><br/>
    <span>A small country conquers a great country</span><br/>
    <span>by merging with it.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, the great country conquers by yielding,</span><br/>
    <span>the small country conquers by being absorbed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The great country needs more people.</span><br/>
    <span>The small country needs greater purpose.</span><br/>
    <span>Each gets what it needs.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>It is proper for greatness to yield.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-62" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Tao is the ground of the ten thousand things.</span><br/>
    <span>It is the refuge of the good man</span><br/>
    <span>and the guardian of the bad.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Fine speech can buy high rank.</span><br/>
    <span>Good deeds can earn respect.</span><br/>
    <span>Should one without them be abandoned?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore, on the day the son is crowned</span><br/>
    <span>and the three ministers named,</span><br/>
    <span>do not send gifts of jade and teams of horses.</span><br/>
    <span>Remain still and offer Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why has Tao been honored since ancient times?</span><br/>
    <span>“Seek and you will find; transgress and you will be forgiven.”</span><br/>
    <span>Is this not the reason?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Above all else, observe Tao.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-63" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Perform not-doing.</span><br/>
    <span>Work without motive.</span><br/>
    <span>Savor what has no flavor.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Regard the small as great, the few as many.</span><br/>
    <span>Repay injury with compassion.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>See simplicity in the complex.</span><br/>
    <span>See greatness in small gestures.</span><br/>
    <span>Confront the difficult while easy.</span><br/>
    <span>Do great things in small increments.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage does nothing great,</span><br/>
    <span>but great things are accomplished.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Easy promises are easily broken.</span><br/>
    <span>Things taken lightly become difficult.</span><br/>
    <span>The sage regards nothing lightly,</span><br/>
    <span>therefore nothing is difficult.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-64" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>That which is still is easy to contain.</span><br/>
    <span>What has not yet begun is easy to prevent.</span><br/>
    <span>The fragile is easily broken.</span><br/>
    <span>The minute is easily dispelled.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>See things before they emerge.</span><br/>
    <span>Attend to them before they grow out of control.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>A tree trunk that fills a man’s arms</span><br/>
    <span>begins as a tiny shoot.</span><br/>
    <span>A terrace nine stories high</span><br/>
    <span>begins with a basket of dirt.</span><br/>
    <span>A journey of a thousand miles</span><br/>
    <span>begins underfoot.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Those who strive meet defeat.</span><br/>
    <span>Those who grasp lose their grip.</span><br/>
    <span>The sage does nothing and never fails.</span><br/>
    <span>He has nothing and never loses.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Failure often comes on the verge of success.</span><br/>
    <span>Be as careful in the end as the beginning</span><br/>
    <span>and there will be no failure.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage desires no-desire.</span><br/>
    <span>He does not value wealth.</span><br/>
    <span>He learns by not thinking.</span><br/>
    <span>He restores to others what has been lost.</span><br/>
    <span>He helps the ten thousand things return to original nature</span><br/>
    <span>but does not interfere.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-65" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The ancient observers of Tao did not teach it to others.</span><br/>
    <span>They let them remain simple and unknowing.</span><br/>
    <span>People are difficult to deal with when they think they know.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Leaders who think they know are a curse to those they lead.</span><br/>
    <span>Leaders with a simple heart are a blessing to all.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Both are manifestations of the same truth.</span><br/>
    <span>Knowing the truth is Virtue.</span><br/>
    <span>Virtue is mysterious, profound, far reaching.</span><br/>
    <span>Reaching far, it returns to itself and is complete.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-66" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Rivers rule valleys and seas rule rivers</span><br/>
    <span>because they take the lower position.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage is elevated by placing himself below others.</span><br/>
    <span>He leads by leaving himself behind.</span><br/>
    <span>When he assumes high position, the people do not feel his weight.</span><br/>
    <span>When he rules they do not feel threatened.</span><br/>
    <span>The realm rejoices and never tires of his presence.</span><br/>
    <span>Because he does not contend, nothing stands against him.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-67" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Everyone agrees the Tao I teach is great, yet unlike anything else.</span><br/>
    <span>Indeed, if it were not singular it would not endure.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>I hold three treasures close:</span><br/>
    <span>The first is unconditional regard for all.</span><br/>
    <span>The second is being content with little.</span><br/>
    <span>The third is not placing myself before others.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>From compassion comes courage.</span><br/>
    <span>From contentment comes an open heart.</span><br/>
    <span>From humility comes the capacity to lead.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Daring without mercy,</span><br/>
    <span>giving without generosity,</span><br/>
    <span>ruling without modesty,</span><br/>
    <span>this is the way of death.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Attacking with compassion, you are victorious.</span><br/>
    <span>Defending with compassion, you are impregnable.</span><br/>
    <span>What heaven favors it infuses with compassion.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-68" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A good general is not aggressive.</span><br/>
    <span>A good warrior is not wrathful.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>A skillful conqueror does not instigate battle.</span><br/>
    <span>A skillful employer serves those under him.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is the virtue of not contending.</span><br/>
    <span>This is mastering the strength of others.</span><br/>
    <span>This is being in accord with the principles of heaven.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-69" epub:type="chapter" title="Sixty Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Skillful warriors have a saying:</span><br/>
    <span>“Do not move first, play the guest.</span><br/>
    <span>Do not move forward an inch, retreat a foot.”</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>This is called advancing without moving.</span><br/>
    <span>Reaching without showing one’s arms.</span><br/>
    <span>Capturing without attacking.</span><br/>
    <span>Doing battle without weapons.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>There is no greater mistake than underestimating the enemy.</span><br/>
    <span>Underestimating the enemy, I risk losing everything of value.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, when equal opponents are matched,</span><br/>
    <span>the one aware of sorrow will prevail.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-70" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>What I teach is easy to understand and practice,</span><br/>
    <span>yet no one understands it or puts it to practice.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>My words are from the source.</span><br/>
    <span>My actions are those of the ancestor.</span><br/>
    <span>People do not understand this.</span><br/>
    <span>Therefore, they do not understand me.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Those who see me as I am are rare.</span><br/>
    <span>Those who seek to follow my teachings are few.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage wears coarse clothing</span><br/>
    <span>but carries jade in his pockets.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-71" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>To know that you do not know is clarity.</span><br/>
    <span>To think that you know is sickness.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Being sick of sickness, one attains clarity.</span><br/>
    <span>The sage is sick of sickness.</span><br/>
    <span>Therefore, he is clear.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-72" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Two">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When people do not respect power,</span><br/>
    <span>disaster is on the horizon.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Do not limit their space.</span><br/>
    <span>Do not disrupt their lives.</span><br/>
    <span>Do not oppress them</span><br/>
    <span>and they will not tire of you.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage knows himself, but does not claim knowledge.</span><br/>
    <span>He loves himself, but does not feel important.</span><br/>
    <span>He lets go of that and chooses this.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-73" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Three">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A courageous and reckless man will kill or be killed.</span><br/>
    <span>A courageous and careful man preserves life.</span><br/>
    <span>Of the two, which is beneficial and which brings harm?</span><br/>
    <span>Who knows what heaven favors.</span><br/>
    <span>Even the sage is unsure.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The way of heaven does not contend, yet overcomes.</span><br/>
    <span>Does not speak, yet converses.</span><br/>
    <span>Without being summoned it comes of its own,</span><br/>
    <span>unhurried, and according to plan.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The net of heaven is vast.</span><br/>
    <span>Though the mesh is wide, nothing slips through.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-74" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Four">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>If people are not afraid of death,</span><br/>
    <span>why threaten them with death?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>If people are in constant fear of death,</span><br/>
    <span>and if being unruly means you will be killed,</span><br/>
    <span>who would dare be unruly?</span><br/>
    <span>Who would dare kill him?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>There is always a lord of death.</span><br/>
    <span>Trying to do his job is like</span><br/>
    <span>taking the place of an artisan.</span><br/>
    <span>He who tries to carve like a master carpenter</span><br/>
    <span>rarely avoids being cut.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-75" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Five">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Why are the people starving?</span><br/>
    <span>The government takes their grain for taxes.</span><br/>
    <span>Therefore they are starving.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why are the people rebellious?</span><br/>
    <span>The government interferes in their lives.</span><br/>
    <span>Therefore they are rebellious.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Why do people ignore the gravity of death?</span><br/>
    <span>They are consumed by the intensity of life.</span><br/>
    <span>Therefore they ignore the gravity of death.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>One who is not consumed by life</span><br/>
    <span>is better off than one who values it.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-76" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Six">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>A man is born supple and soft.</span><br/>
    <span>At death he is rigid and hard.</span><br/>
    <span>The ten thousand things, the grass, the trees,</span><br/>
    <span>while living are tender and pliant.</span><br/>
    <span>In death they are dry and withered.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The hard and unbending are companions of death.</span><br/>
    <span>The soft and yielding are companions of life.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Thus, an inflexible army is easily defeated.</span><br/>
    <span>An unbending tree is easily broken.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The hard and strong are laid low.</span><br/>
    <span>The soft and yielding are raised up.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-77" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Seven">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>The way of heaven, is it not like the stringing of a bow?</span><br/>
    <span>The high end is lowered, the low is raised up.</span><br/>
    <span>If the string is too long it is shortened.</span><br/>
    <span>If the string is too short it is lengthened.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The way of heaven takes from the excessive</span><br/>
    <span>and gives to the insufficient.</span><br/>
    <span>The way of man is different.</span><br/>
    <span>Those with too much take from those who have little.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Who keeps just enough and gives the rest to the world?</span><br/>
    <span>Only observers of Tao.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage works without expectation.</span><br/>
    <span>Achieves without taking credit.</span><br/>
    <span>He does not desire to seem worthy.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-78" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Eight">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>In all the world nothing is softer and weaker than water.</span><br/>
    <span>Yet for overcoming the hard and strong it is unequaled.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The pliant overcomes the unbending.</span><br/>
    <span>The submissive overcomes the unyielding.</span><br/>
    <span>Everyone knows this but no one puts it into practice.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Therefore the sage says:</span><br/>
    <span>He who takes on the suffering of the world is fit to rule it.</span><br/>
    <span>One who accepts the evils of the world as his own</span><br/>
    <span>is a king under heaven.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Truth is often a paradox.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-79" epub:type="chapter" title="Seventy Nine">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>When bitter quarrels are settled,</span><br/>
    <span>enmity is sure to remain.</span><br/>
    <span>What can be done?</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>A man of virtue pays his debts</span><br/>
    <span>but does not exact his due.</span><br/>
    <span>He fulfills his obligations</span><br/>
    <span>but makes no demands.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The Tao of heaven plays no favorites.</span><br/>
    <span>It flows with Virtue.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-80" epub:type="chapter" title="Eighty">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Let the state be small.</span><br/>
    <span>Let the people be few.</span><br/>
    <span>Though they have equipment to arm ten battalions</span><br/>
    <span>they do not do it.</span><br/>
    <span>They take death seriously and do not venture far.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>They have ships and carts</span><br/>
    <span>but there is no place they want to go.</span><br/>
    <span>They have armor and weapons</span><br/>
    <span>but they are not displayed.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Men return to knotting rope.</span><br/>
    <span>They enjoy their meals and are comfortable in their clothes.</span><br/>
    <span>They are content in their homes and happy with their lives.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>Though the neighboring state is so close</span><br/>
    <span>you can hear the cocks and dogs,</span><br/>
    <span>they leave each other in peace as they grow old and die.</span>
</p>
</section>

<section id="ch-81" epub:type="chapter" title="Eighty One">
<p class="stanza">
    <span>Truth is not eloquent.</span><br/>
    <span>Eloquence is not truth.</span><br/>
    <span>Wise men do not try to persuade.</span><br/>
    <span>Whoever tries to persuade is not wise.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>One who knows, claims unknowing.</span><br/>
    <span>One who claims knowledge, does not know.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The sage does not acquire.</span><br/>
    <span>He bestows what he has on others</span><br/>
    <span>and always has more.</span><br/>
    <span>The more he gives, the greater his abundance.</span>
</p><p class="stanza">
    <span>The way of heaven is to give without harm.</span><br/>
    <span>The way of the sage is to serve without striving.</span>
</p>
</section>

</body>
</html>
